Chimeric antigen receptor

Chimeric antigen receptors (CARs, also known as chimeric immunoreceptors,
chimeric T cell receptors or artificial T cell receptors) are receptor
proteins that have been engineered to give T cells the new ability to target a
specific protein. The receptors are chimeric because they combine both
antigen-binding and T-cell activating functions into a single receptor.

CAR-T cell therapy uses T cells engineered with CARs for cancer therapy. The
premise of CAR-T immunotherapy is to modify T cells to recognize cancer cells
in order to more effectively target and destroy them. Scientists harvest T
cells from people, genetically alter them, then infuse the resulting CAR-T
cells into patients to attack their tumors. CAR-T cells can be either
derived from T cells in a patient's own blood (autologous) or derived from the
T cells of another healthy donor (allogenic). Once isolated from a person,
these T cells are genetically engineered to express a specific CAR, which
programs them to target an antigen that is present on the surface of tumors.
For safety, CAR-T cells are engineered to be specific to an antigen expressed
on a tumor that is not expressed on healthy cells.

After CAR-T cells are infused into a patient, they act as a "living drug"
against cancer cells. When they come in contact with their targeted antigen
on a cell, CAR-T cells bind to it and become activated, then proceed to
proliferate and become cytotoxic. CAR-T cells destroy cells through several
mechanisms, including extensive stimulated cell proliferation, increasing the
degree to which they are toxic to other living cells (cytotoxicity), and by
causing the increased secretion of factors that can affect other cells such as
cytokines, interleukins, and growth factors.

Use in cancer

The diagram above represents the process of chimeric antigen receptor T-cell
therapy (CAR), this is a method of immunotherapy, which is a growing practice
in the treatment of cancer. The final result should be a production of
equipped T-cells that can recognize and fight the infected cancer cells in the
body.

1\. T-cells (represented by objects labeled as ’t’) are removed from the
patient's blood.

2\. Then in a lab setting the gene that encodes for the specific antigen
receptors are incorporated into the T-cells.

3\. Thus producing the CAR receptors (labeled as c) on the surface of the
cells.

4\. The newly modified T-cells are then further harvested and grown in the
lab.

5\. After a certain time period, the engineered T-cells are infused back into
the patient.

|

This section needs to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent
events or newly available information. (October 2016)  
  
---|---  
  
Depiction of adoptive cell transfer therapy with CAR-engineered T cells

Adoptive transfer of T cells expressing chimeric antigen receptors is a
promising anti-cancer therapeutic as CAR-modified T cells can be engineered to
target virtually any tumor associated antigen. There is great potential for
this approach to improve patient-specific cancer therapy in a profound way.
Following collection of a patient's T cells, the cells are genetically
engineered to express CARs specifically directed toward antigens on the
patient's tumor cells, then infused back into the patient.

Preparation

The first step in the introduction of CAR-T cells into the body of a patient
is the removal of activated leukocytes from the blood in a process known as
leukocyte apheresis. The leukocytes are removed using a blood cell separator.
The patient’s autologous peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) are then
separated and collected from the buffy coat that forms. The products of
leukocyte apheresis are then transferred into a cell processing center. In the
cell processing center, specific T-cells are activated in a certain
environment in which they can actively proliferate. The cells are activated
using a type of cytokine called an interleukin, specifically Inter-Leukin 2
(IL-2) as well as anti-CD3 antibodies.

The T-cells are then transfected with CD19 CAR genes by either an integrating
gammaretrovirus (RV) or by lentivirus (LV) vectors. These vectors are very
safe in modern times due to a partial deletion of the U3 region. The
patient undergoes lymphodepletion chemotherapy prior to the introduction of
the engineered CD CAR-T cells. The depletion of the number of circulating
leukocytes in the patient upregulates the number of cytokines that are
produced which help to promote the expansion of the engineered CAR-T cell.

Safety concerns

CAR-T cells are undoubtedly a major breakthrough in cancer treatment. However,
there are still expected and unexpected toxicities that result from CAR-T
cells being introduced into the body. These toxicities include cytokine
release syndrome, neurological toxicity, on-target/off-tumor recognition,
insertional mutagenesis, and anaphylaxis.

Cytokine release syndrome (CRS) is a condition in which the immune system is
activated and releases an increased number of inflammatory cytokines. The
clinical manifestations of this syndrome include high fever, fatigue, myalgia,
nausea, tachycardia, capillary leakages, cardiac dysfunction, hepatic failure,
and renal impairment.

The neurological toxicity associated with CAR-T cells have clinical
manifestations that include delirium, the partial loss of the ability to speak
a coherent language while still having the ability to interpret language
(expressive aphasia), lowered alertness (obtundation), and seizures.
During some clinical trials deaths caused by neurotoxicity have occurred. The
main cause of death from neurotoxicity is cerebral edema. In a study carried
out by Juno Therapeutics, Inc., five patients enrolled in the trial died as a
result of cerebral edema. Two of the patients were treated with
cyclophosphamide alone and the remaining three were treated with a combination
of cyclophosphamide and fludarabine. In another clinical trial sponsored
by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, there was one reported case of
irreversible and fatal neurological toxicity 122 days after the administration
of CAR-T cells.

On-target/off-tumor recognition occurs when the CAR-T cell recognizes the
correct antigen, but the antigen is expressed on healthy, non-pathogenic
tissue. This results in the CAR-T cells attacking non-tumor tissue, such as
healthy B cells that express CD19. The severity of this adverse effect can
vary from B-cell aplasia to extreme toxicity leading to death.

Anaphylaxis is an expected side effect, as the CAR is made with a foreign
monoclonal antibody and as a result, invokes an immune response.

There is also a potential for insertional mutagenesis, which can occur when
using a virus to insert the CAR vector DNA into a host T cell. Lentiviral (LV)
vectors carry a lower risk than retroviral (RV) vectors. However, both have
the potential to be oncogenic.

Because it is a relatively new treatment, there is little data about the long-
term effects of CAR-T cell therapy. There are still concerns about long-term
survival as well as pregnancy complications in female patients treated with
CAR-T cells.

Structure

CAR-T cells create a link between an extracellular ligand recognition domain
to an intracellular signalling molecule which in turn activates T cells. The
extracellular ligand recognition domain is usually a single-chain variable
fragment (scFv). CARs are composed of three regions: the ectodomain, the
transmembrane domain and the endodomain.

Different components of an artificial

TCR

Ectodomain

The ectodomain is the region of the receptor that is exposed to the
extracellular fluid and consists of 3 components: a signalling peptide, an
antigen recognition region and a spacer.

A signal peptide directs the nascent protein into the endoplasmic reticulum.
The signal protein in CAR is called a single-chain variable fragment
(scFv), a type of protein known as a fusion protein or chimeric protein. A
fusion protein is a protein that is formed by merging two or more genes that
code originally for different proteins but when they are translated in the
cell, the translation produces one or more polypeptides with functional
properties derived for each of the original genes.

A scFv is a chimeric protein made up of the light and heavy chains of
immunoglobins connected with a short linker peptide. The linker consists of
hydrophilic residues with stretches of glycine and serine in it for
flexibility as well as stretches of glutamate and lysine for added
solubility.

Transmembrane domain

The transmembrane domain is a hydrophobic alpha helix that spans the membrane.
The transmembrane domain is essential for the stability of the receptor as a
whole. At present, the CD28 transmembrane domain is the most stable of the
domains.

Generally, the transmembrane domain from the most membrane proximal component
of the endodomain is used. Using the CD3-zeta transmembrane domain may result
in incorporation of the artificial TCR into the native TCR, a factor that is
dependent on the presence of the native CD3-zeta transmembrane charged
aspartic acid residue. Different transmembrane domains result in different
receptor stability. The CD28 transmembrane domain results in a highly
expressed, stable receptor.

Endodomain

This is the functional end of the receptor. After antigen recognition,
receptors cluster and a signal is transmitted to the cell. The most
commonly used endodomain component is CD3-zeta which contains 3 ITAMs. This
transmits an activation signal to the T cell after the antigen is bound.
CD3-zeta may not provide a fully competent activation signal and co-
stimulatory signaling is needed. For example, chimeric CD28 and OX40 can be
used with CD3-Zeta to transmit a proliferative/survival signal or all three
can be used together.

History

Depiction of first, second, and third generation chimeric antigen receptors
with the scFv segments in green and the various TCR signalling components in
red, blue and yellow.



First generation CARs were developed in 1989 by Gideon Gross and Zelig
Eshhar at Weizmann Institute, Israel. The first generation of CARs
are composed of an extracellular binding domain, a hinge region, a
transmembrane domain, and one or more intracellular signaling domains.
Extracellular binding domain contains single‐chain variable fragments (scFvs)
derived from tumor antigen‐reactive antibodies and usually have high
specificity to tumor antigen. All CARs harbor the CD3ζ chain domain as the
intracellular signaling domain, which is the primary transmitter of signals.
Second generation CARs also contain co‐stimulatory domains, like CD28 and/or
4‐1BB. The involvement of these intracellular signaling domains improve T cell
proliferation, cytokine secretion, resistance to apoptosis, and in vivo
persistence. Besides co-stimulatory domains, the third‐generation CARs
combine multiple signaling domains, such as CD3z-CD28-41BB or CD3z-CD28-OX40,
to augment T cell activity. Preclinical data shows the third-generation CARs
exhibit improved effector functions and in vivo persistence as compared to
second‐generation CARs. Recently, the fourth‐generation CARs (also known as
TRUCKs or armored CARs), combine the expression of a second‐generation CAR
with factors that enhance anti‐tumoral activity (e.g., cytokines,
co‐stimulatory ligands).

The evolution of CAR therapy is an excellent example of the application of
basic research to the clinic. The PI3K binding site used was identified in co-
receptor CD28, while the ITAM motifs were identified as a target of the
CD4- and CD8-p56lck complexes.

The introduction of Strep-tag II sequence (an eight-residue minimal peptide
sequence (Trp-Ser-His-Pro-Gln-Phe-Glu-Lys) that exhibits intrinsic affinity
toward streptavidin) into specific sites in synthetic CARs or natural
T-cell receptors provides engineered T cells with an identification marker for
rapid purification, a method for tailoring spacer length of chimeric receptors
for optimal function and a functional element for selective antibody-coated,
microbead-driven, large-scale expansion. Strep-tag can be used to
stimulate the engineered cells, causing them to grow rapidly. Using an
antibody that binds the Strep-tag, the engineered cells can be expanded by
200-fold. Unlike existing methods this technology stimulates only cancer-
specific T cells.

Smart T cell

Combined with exogenous molecules, some synthetic control devices have been
implemented on CAR-T cells and alter the cell activity. Smart T cell is
engineered with suicide gene or other synthetic control panels to precisely
control therapeutic function over the timing and dosage, there by alleviating
cytotoxicity. Several strategies to improve safety and efficacy of CAR-T
cells are:

Suicide gene engineering: engineered T cells are incorporated with suicide
genes, which can be activated by extracellular molecule and then induce T cell
apoptosis. Herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (HSV-TK) and inducible
caspase 9 (iCas9) are two types suicide genes have been integrated into CAR-T
cells. In iCas9 system, the suicide gene is composed of the
sequence of the mutated FK506-binding protein with high specificity to a
small-molecule, AP1903 and a gene encoding human caspase 9 switch. When the
release of cytokines by CAR-T cells becomes more pronounced than basic levels,
the iCas9 can be dimerized and lead to rapid apoptosis of T cells. Although
both suicide genes demonstrate a noticeable function of as a safety switch in
clinical trials for cellular therapies, some hinder defects limit the
application of this strategy. HSV-TK is derived from virus and may be
immunogenic to humans. The suicide gene strategies may not act quickly
enough to eliminate off-tumor cytotoxicity as well.

Dual-antigen receptor: T cells are engineered to express two tumor-associated
antigen receptors at the same time. The dual-antigen receptor of engineered T
cell module has been reported to have less intense side effects. The
activation of CAR-T cell via TCR-CD3ζ signal transduction pathway is transient
and a complementary signal pathway provided by co-stimulatory molecules on
antigen presenting cells promotes survival of modified-T cell can ability in
controlling tumor. An in vivo study in mice shows the dual-receptor T
cells effectively eradicated prostate cancer and achieved complete long-term
survival.

ON-switch: ON-switch CAR-T cell split synthetic receptors into two parts: the
first part mainly contains an antigen binding domain towards and the other
part features two different downstream signaling elements (e.g. CD3ζ and
4-1BB). Upon the presence of an exogenous molecule (rapamycin analogs for
example), two physically separated signaling elements fuse together and CAR-T
cells exert therapeutic functions. In this mechanism, the engineered T
cell shows therapeutic function only in the presence of both tumor antigen and
a benign exogenous molecule.

Bifunctional molecules as switches: The bispecific antibodies are developed as
an efficacious bridge to target cytotoxic T cells to cancer cells and causes
localized T cell activation. In this strategy, the bispecific antibody targets
CD3 molecule of T cell and tumor-associated antigen presented on cancer cell
surface. The anti-CD20/CD3 bispecific molecule shows high specificity to
both malignant B cells and cancer cells in mice. FITC is another
bifunctional molecule used in this strategy. FITC can redirect and regulate
the activity of the FITC-specific CAR-T cells toward tumor cells with folate
receptors.

SMDC adaptor technology

SMDCs (small molecule drug conjugates) platform in immuno-oncology is a novel
(currently experimental) approach that makes possible the engineering of a
single universal CAR T cell, which binds with extraordinarily high affinity to
a benign molecule designated as FITC. These cells are then used to treat
various cancer types when co-administered with bispecific SMDC adaptor
molecules. These unique bispecific adaptors are constructed with a FITC
molecule and a tumor-homing molecule to precisely bridge the universal CAR T
cell with the cancer cells, which causes localized T cell activation. Anti-
tumor activity in mice is induced only when both the universal CAR T cells
plus the correct antigen-specific adaptor molecules are present. Anti-tumor
activity and toxicity can be controlled by adjusting the administered adaptor
molecule dosing. Treatment of antigenically heterogeneous tumors can be
achieved by administration of a mixture of the desired antigen-specific
adaptors. Thus, several challenges of current CAR T cell therapies, such as:

the inability to control the rate of cytokine release and tumor lysis
the absence of an “off switch” that can terminate cytotoxic activity when tumor eradication is complete
a requirement to generate a different CAR T cell for each unique tumor antigen

may be solved or mitigated using this approach.

Clinical studies

As of August 2017, there were around 200 clinical trials happening globally
involving CAR-T cells. Around 65% of those trials targeted blood cancers,
and 80% of them involved CD19 CAR-T cells targeting B-cell cancers. In
2016, studies began to explore the viability of other antigens, such as
CD20.

FDA approvals

The first two FDA approved CAR-T therapies both target the CD19 antigen, which
is found on many types of B-cell cancers. Tisagenlecleucel (Kymriah) is
approved to treat relapsed/refractory B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL), while axicabtagene ciloleucel (Yescarta) is approved to treat
relapsed/refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL).

Kymriah's clinical trial showed an 83% remission rate of all types of B-cell
ALL after three months post treatment. However, 49% of patients also
suffered cytokine release syndrome (CRS), a serious side effect that has been
responsible for several deaths in clinical trials run by Novartis’
competitors.