Pros and Cons of Immunotherapy

Your immune system is made up of your white blood cells plus the organs and
tissues of your lymph system, like your bone marrow. Its main job is to help
your body fight off disease and stay healthy.

Immunotherapy drugs help your immune system work harder or make it easier for
it to find and get rid of cancer cells.

Several immunotherapy drugs have been approved to fight cancer, and hundreds
more are being tested in clinical trials (research studies that use volunteers
to test new medicines). If immunotherapy seems like the best way to fight your
cancer, your doctor may know of a clinical trial you can join.

If your doctor suggests immunotherapy to fight your cancer, there’s a lot to
talk to them about before you decide if it’s right for you.

What Are the Benefits?

There are many reasons your doctor might think immunotherapy is a good choice
for you:

Immunotherapy may work when other treatments don’t. Some cancers (like skin
cancer) don’t respond well to radiation or chemotherapy but start to go away
after immunotherapy.

It can help other cancer treatments work better. Other therapies you have,
like chemotherapy, may work better if you also have immunotherapy.

It causes fewer side effects than other treatments. This is because it targets
just your immune system and not all the cells in your body.

Your cancer may be less likely to return. When you have immunotherapy, your
immune system learns to go after cancer cells if they ever come back. This is
called immunomemory, and it could help you stay cancer-free for a longer time.

What Are the Risks?

Immunotherapy holds a lot of promise as a cancer treatment. Still, it can
cause some issues.

You might have a bad reaction. The area where the medication goes into your
body could hurt, itch, swell, turn red, or get sore.

There are side effects. Some types of immunotherapy rev up your immune system
and make you feel like you have the flu, complete with fever, chills, and
fatigue. Others could cause problems like swelling, weight gain from extra
fluids, heart palpitations, a stuffy head, and diarrhea. Most of the time,
these ease up after your first treatment.

Continued

It can harm organs and systems. Some of these drugs can cause your immune
system to attack organs like your heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, or intestines.

It isn’t a quick fix. In some cases, immunotherapy takes longer to work than
other treatments. Your cancer may not go away quickly.

It doesn’t work for everyone. Right now, immunotherapy works for less than
half the people who try it. Many people only have a partial response. This
means your tumor could stop growing or get smaller, but it doesn’t go away.
Doctors aren’t sure yet why immunotherapy helps only some people.

Your body could get used to it. Over time, immunotherapy may stop having an
effect on your cancer cells. This means that even if it works at first, your
tumor could start to grow again.

Sources

SOURCES:

National Cancer Institute: “Immunotherapy.”

American Cancer Society: “What is cancer immunotherapy?”

Cancer Research Institute/I’m the Answer to Cancer: “Benefits of Cancer
Immunotherapy.”

Cancer Research Institute: “About Clinical Trials,” “Cancer Immunotherapy:
Should You Participate?”

Cancer Support Community: “Frankly Speaking About Cancer: Your Immune System &
Cancer

Treatment.”

University of Texas San Antonio Cancer Therapy & Research Center:
“Immunotherapy.”

University of California San Francisco: “Killing Cancer Through the Immune
System.”

Dana-Farber Cancer Institute: “What are the Side Effects of Immunotherapy?”

Vanderbilt University Medical Center: “Study details rare heart risk of
certain cancer therapies.”

American Society of Clinical Oncology/Cancer.net: “Immunotherapy 2.0: The 2017
Clinical

Cancer Advance of the Year,” “Understanding Immunotherapy.”

Coalition of Cancer Cooperative Groups: “Learn About Cancer Clinical Trials.”

© 2018 WebMD, LLC. All rights reserved.

