What Exactly Is Cancer Immunotherapy?

Cancer immunotherapy is in the spotlight this week after two scientists won
the Nobel Prize on Monday for their contributions to the treatment.

The 2018 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded jointly to James
Allison, chair of the department of immunology at MD Anderson Cancer Center in
Texas, and Tasuku Honjo, a distinguished professor at the Kyoto University
Institute for Advanced Study in Japan, for their discoveries that lead to a
new type of cancer treatment that targets people’s immune systems. The
treatment, called immunotherapy, takes the brakes off the body’s main defense
mechanism, a type of white blood cell known as a T-cell. Unrestricted T-cells
can attack tumor cells more effectively and eradicate cancer from the body.

“Allison and Honjo showed how different strategies for inhibiting the brakes
on the immune system can be used in the treatment of cancer,” the Nobel
Assembly said in a statement. “The seminal discoveries by the two Laureates
constitute a landmark in our fight against cancer.”

What is immunotherapy?

Immunotherapy harnesses the body’s own immune system to fight cancer cells
more effectively. The most prominent type of immunotherapy — and the idea that
won Allison and Honjo the Nobel Prize — are called immune checkpoint
inhibitors.

Here’s what you should know: T-cells are the immune system’s main fighter
cells. They hunt down and destroy foreign invaders, like infections. But to
prevent T-cells from going overboard and attacking the body’s own, healthy
cells, several control mechanisms (also called checkpoints) are built in.
Checkpoint inhibitors are drugs — based on the work of Allison and Honjo —
that block the body’s control mechanisms, so that T-cells are more active and
can fight cancer cells more freely.

How is immunotherapy different from other types of cancer treatments?

Typical cancer treatments, like chemotherapy or radiation, attack the tumor
cells directly, whereas immunotherapies ramp up the body’s own immune system
to better fight the cancer. Chemotherapy and radiation are very effective at
shrinking tumors for many different types of cancer, but some forms seem to be
impervious to the treatments. What’s more, chemotherapy and radiation have
extremely unpleasant side effects.

What was the Nobel Prize for?

Cancer cells can use checkpoints to their advantage, and evade the immune
system. A checkpoint can shut T-cells down and hamper their ability to attack,
allowing the cancer to spread uninhibitedly. The two winners, Allison and
Honjo, each discovered a different checkpoint on T-cells that can be targeted
by cancer cells to prevent or slow down an attack.

The first checkpoint identified by Allison, called CTLA-4, stops T-cells from
replicating. When a T-cell identifies a tumor cell and initiates its assault,
it also starts to copy itself, producing even more T-cells to overwhelm and
destroy the tumor. CTLA-4 is a protein on the T-cell that prevents it from
reproducing, slowing down and eventually stopping the attack. This mechanism
ensures that the T-cells don’t keep dividing forever.

T-cells have another protein on their surface called PD-1 — identified by
Honjo — which attaches to a matching protein called PD-L1 on the surface of
other cells. If a T-cell comes into contact with PD-L1, it will leave that
cell alone, and many cells in the body have PD-L1 proteins to tell T-cells not
to attack them. However, some cancer cells mask themselves in PD-L1 proteins,
tricking the T-cells into thinking they are normal healthy cells.

What types of cancers are treated with immunotherapy?

Immune checkpoint inhibitors have been revolutionary for certain types of
cancer that are largely resistant to traditional therapies. CTLA-4 inhibitors
are very effective in treating advanced melanoma (the most serious type of
skin cancer). PD-1 inhibitors are now used to treat many different types of
cancer, including lung, kidney, and bladder cancer, as well as Hodgkin
lymphoma. Not every person or every type of cancer responds to this type of
immunotherapy, and researchers are now trying to figure out why that is.
Oncologists have also started to combine the two types of drugs, and they
appear to benefit more patients when they are delivered together.

Are there any side effects to immunotherapy?

The biggest risk accompanying immunotherapy is the development of autoimmune
diseases, and many patients who receive immunotherapy experience side effects.
Most of these are pretty minor, such as a rash or diarrhea. A very small
percentage of patients experience a more severe response, including colitis
and type I diabetes.

