CANCER IMMUNOTHERAPY
Developing ways to help harness a person’s immune system to fight cancer.

See all Topics
TOPICS  CANCER IMMUNOTHERAPY
A New Age for Neoantigens

Cellular therapies that target tumor-specific neoantigens could be the next evolution in personalized cancer care.

Efficiency by Design

We’re searching for more effective immunotherapy-based combinations by rethinking how we design clinical trials.

Understanding Bladder Cancer Perceptions

Although bladder cancer is common in the U.S., many factors can make it hard to discuss.

Beyond The Cycle

A new conceptual framework could help guide the future of personalized cancer immunotherapy.

Decoding Cancer

Can individualized cancer vaccines help us build custom cancer treatments?

Behind the Cycle

What does a scientific breakthrough look like? For Dan Chen and Ira Mellman, it looks a lot like a wine bar. Read more about their discovery of the Cancer-Immunity Cycle.

Oncology
Tipping the Scales

With OX40, we may have found a way to activate the body’s immune system to fight cancer.

Understanding PD-L1

See why the PD-L1 protein is such an important target in cancer immunotherapy research.

Reverse Translation

With cancer immunotherapy, we may need to go from bench to bedside, and then back again.

Understanding Bladder Cancer

​Get the facts on bladder cancer, the fifth most common form of cancer in the U.S.​

Lymph Node Labyrinth

Get ready to harness the power of your immune system and learn more about the Cancer-Immunity Cycle in our new game, Lymph Node Labyrinth!

T Cells Attack

You have the power to fight cancer in T Cells Attack, a new game for your computer or mobile device.

Cancer Immunotherapy
Clearing Traffic Jams in Tumors

Our immune systems are complex, and a protein called TIGIT, discovered at Genentech, may be yet another way to activate the immune system against cancer.

Planning for the Future

New research into advanced bladder cancer is giving people hope for the future. This is Peter’s story.

PD-L1/PD-1 Pathway: A Security Checkpoint

Dr. Dan Chen explains how immunotherapy may affect the PD-L1/PD-1 pathway, enabling the body to better detect and fight cancer.

Lung Cancer: Looking Back and Moving Forward

The understanding of lung cancer has changed in the last 70 years – both culturally and clinically. Explore the evolution of the disease through Bob’s eyes.

The Cancer-Immunity Cycle

A new framework for cancer immunotherapy research around the world.

PD-L1: A Biomarker for Cancer Immunotherapy?

The role of PD-L1 on tumor cells and tumor-infiltrating immune cells is an important area of cancer-immunotherapy research.

Immunotherapy: 100 Years New

Scientists first considered the prospect of harnessing the body's own immune system to fight cancer more than 100 years ago.

Cancer Immunotherapy: Living Up to the Promise

A closer look at one of today’s most promising approaches to treating cancer