Stand Up To Cancer

  Your Body Your Hope

 Your immune system may be the key to beating cancer.

Stand Up To Cancer has had a major role in galvanizing immunotherapy
approaches. The big opportunity is to take immunotherapy from the early stage
ideas and get it out to where the public can benefit.

What is immunotherapy?

Immunotherapy, an exciting approach to cancer treatment, works by empowering
your body’s own immune system to correctly identify and eradicate cancer
cells. This approach has been used to effectively fight many types of cancer,
with new research leading to greater hope each day.

What cancers can immunotherapy be used for?

Immunotherapy enables the immune system to recognize and target cancer cells,
making it a universal form of treatment. Currently, immunotherapy can be used
to treat forms of these cancers:

Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia
Bladder Cancer
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
Folicular Lymphoma
Hairy Cell Leukemia
Head and Neck Cancer
Hodgkin Lymphoma

Kidney (Renal) Cancer
Lung Cancer
Mantle Cell Lymphoma
Melanoma
Multiple Myeloma
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma

Many researchers believe it has the power to be the cure for all cancer types,
including:

Brain Cancer
Breast Cancer
Cervical
Colorectal
Esophageal
Liver

Ovarian
Pancreatic
Prostate
Sarcoma
Stomach

 Why are immunotherapy clinical trials important?

Currently, only six active immunotherapies have been approved for cancer,
meaning hundreds of other new and promising cancer immunotherapy treatments
are only available to patients in clinical trials. Participation in these
types of clinical trials may be the most promising treatment option for
patients facing cancer today and is critical to the development and approval
of these treatments in the future.

 How do I know if immunotherapy is right for me?

Don’t hesitate to ask questions. Talk to your doctor, research nurse and the
rest of your medical care team about clinical trials they might recommend or
ones you’ve found online. They are often your best resource for helping you
navigate available treatment options.

In general, the questions you will want to ask are similar to those you would
ask your doctor about any type of treatment. Knowing both your treatment and
clinical trial options will help you make the most informed decision.

If your doctor recommends a trial, you will want to learn more about what
treatment the trial involves, possible side effects from the treatment,
financial responsibility, if travel is involved and how long the treatment
will last.
