Yale Cancer Center scientists advise caution in immunotherapy research

In a new study by Yale Cancer Center (YCC), scientists suggest that as the
number of clinical trials in cancer immunotherapy grows exponentially, some
caution should be exercised as we continue to better understand the biology of
these new therapeutic targets. The findings are published today in the journal
Cell.

Researchers around the world have been racing to create therapies that unleash
the power of our immune systems against cancer. The most successful of these
immunotherapies, which target a molecular pathway known as PD-1/PD-L1, have
brightened the landscape for many people suffering with lung cancer and other
types of tumors.

Lieping Chen, M.D., who pioneered work on the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway, cautions
that some immunotherapy research is going off track by moving into drug
development without a firm foundation of basic biological understanding. Chen
is the United Technologies Corporation Professor in Cancer Research and co-
director of the Cancer Immunology Program at YCC.

A case in point is the LAG-3 molecule. Like PD-1, the LAG-3 protein is found
on the surface of the immune system’s T cells, and tumors can use it to shield
themselves from the T cell attack. Most scientists have believed that a
surface protein called MHC class II (MHC-II) is the major “ligand” molecule
that cancer cells can use to connect with the LAG-3 molecule in order to dial
down T cell activity, and thus targeting MHC-II will help to unblock the T
cells.

However, the YCC team has shown that the leading role in LAG-3
immunosuppression instead is filled by a protein known as FGL1.

Although pharmaceutical companies have already brought LAG-3 inhibitors that
block MHC-II into several clinical trials, such drugs are not likely to
perform well, Chen said. “The overall LAG-3 pathway is a lot more complicated
than believed,” he added. “FGL1 is the major ligand for immunosuppression and
designing LAG-3 drugs to block the MHC-II ligand only could be problematic.”
Chen’s lab discovered PD-L1 in 1999 and first developed anti-PD-L1/PD-1
antibodies for cancer immunotherapy.

Looking through the scientific literature, Chen and his colleagues found
surprisingly little evidence that MHC-II is the major ligand to enable LAG-3
immunosuppression. So what mechanism is at work? The Yale team first looked to
see if LAG-3 connects to other ligands, using a “Receptor Array” system
developed in the Chen lab that can individually generate nearly all human cell
membrane proteins, and then analyze how these proteins interact with other
molecules. This experiment clearly showed for the first time that LAG-3 binds
to the FGL1 protein.

Following up with studies in mouse models, the investigators demonstrated that
removing FGL1 either by genetic engineering or with antibody drugs produced an
increase in T cells. Additionally, the mice often slowly developed mild forms
of autoimmune disease. Both findings suggested that the protein can indeed
dampen T cell activity. Moreover, in mouse models of cancer, blocking the
FGL1/LAG-3 interaction boosted T cell activity and slowed tumor growth.

Next, Chen’s team found that FGL1 is produced at strikingly high levels in
various human cancers including lung cancer and melanoma. The researchers also
found that higher levels of FGL1 in the blood of these cancer patients are
linked to poor prognosis and resistance to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapy.

In short, said Chen, “we need to pay attention to the fundamentals of
FGL1/LAG-3 interaction before we can develop efficient drugs for LAG-3 cancer
immunotherapy.”

Yale’s Jun Wang was first author on the paper. Other Yale contributors
included Miguel Sanmamed, Ila Datar, Tina Tianjiao Su, Lan Ji, Jingwei Sun,
Gefeng Zhu, Linghua Zheng, Ting Zhou, Ti Badri, Sheng Yao, Shu Zhu, Agedi
Boto, Mario Sznol and Kurt Schalper. Other co-authors included Ling Chen and
Yusheng Chen of Fujian Medical University, Weiwei Yin of Zhejiang University,
Ignacio Melero of the University of Navarra, and Dario Vignali of the
University of Pittsburgh.

Lead funding for the research was provided by the National Institutes of
Health, Yale Specialized Program of Research Excellence (SPORE) for Lung
cancer and Boehringer Ingelheim.

