Last resort cancer immunotherapy treatments should become first choice,
experts say after trial success

Cutting edge cancer treatments which are currently held back as a last resort
for patients with no other options could mean people “live years longer” when
used as a first choice, experts have said.

Immunotherapies, which reprogramme the immune system to identify and attack
tumours, are a promising, but experimental group of treatments usually given
after aggressive chemotherapy has failed.

Results from a pair of clinical trials in patients with advanced, treatment
resistant cancers found immunotherapy increased survival, with fewer side-
effects, when used immediately.

Experts said this shows more needs to be done to make these experimental
treatments available to patients when they can provide the most benefit,
rather than holding off because of risks or costs.

Both sets of findings were reported at the European Society for Medical
Oncology Congress in Berlin.

The first of the trials, led by the Institute of Cancer Research and Royal
Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, looked at the immunotherapy drug pembrolizumab
in nearly 900 patients with advanced head and neck cancers. The disease had
returned to them after treatment or spread throughout the body.

But the immunotherapy drug increased life expectancy by 40 per cent when
compared to radical chemotherapy.

Among patients where the drug worked best, median life expectancy after
diagnosis was 15 months, compared to 11 months for those given the usual
cocktail of chemotherapy and targeted cancer drugs.

Only 17 per cent of patients experienced serious side-effects, compared to 69
per cent on extreme chemotherapy.

The downside of immunotherapies is that not every patient will respond, but
modern genetic testing methods can allow doctors to identify which tumours are
likely to be vulnerable to certain drugs.

In pembrolizumab’s case, it only worked in around 23 per cent of patients,
compared to 36 per cent given chemotherapy.

It was most effective in those whose tumours have particular markers for the
immune system to target.

In cases where the drug worked best median cases the results were
“unbelievable”, the ICR researchers said.

“We couldn’t believe it when we saw the results,” said Professor Kevin
Harrington, who led the study. “None of us expected pembrolizumab on its own
to work so well in some of these patients – and it raises the prospect that we
could spare some people chemotherapy altogether.”

He added that it could have major implications for these patients, and said:
“The trial is still ongoing, but we expect some patients to go on to live for
years longer than they would have done had they received standard
chemotherapy.”

Another study presented at the conference on Monday looked at immunotherapy
treatment in colorectal cancer which had spread.

In around 4 per cent of colorectal cancer patients, the tumor carries a
mutation which affects DNA repair and these patients typically survive between
14-19 months after survival, compared to up to 25 months for other types.

The early stage trial, led by University of Southern California researchers,
found that 84 per cent of patients saw at least some shrinkage of their
tumors when given the immunotherapy drug nivolumab instead of chemotherapy.

After 12 months 77 per cent were alive with no progression in their tumours.

Professor Paul Workman, chief executive of the Institute of Cancer Research
said the findings show immunotherapy’s potential as a “smarter, kinder and
more effective first-line treatment”.

“We now need to do two things to ensure more patients can benefit from
immunotherapy – develop ways of getting these drugs to work in a higher
proportion of patients, and come to an agreement over the cost of these drugs
to make them more affordable for the NHS.”

