A cure for cancer: how to kill a killer

Last month, the Nobel prize in medicine was awarded for two breakthrough
scientific discoveries heralded as having “revolutionised cancer treatment”,
and “fundamentally changed the way we view how cancer can be managed”. One of
them went to a charismatic, harmonica-playing Texan named Jim Allison for his
breakthrough advances in cancer immunotherapy. His discovery had resulted in
transformative outcomes for cancer patients and a radical new direction for
cancer research.

And yet many cancer patients, and even some doctors, have hardly heard of
cancer immunotherapy or refuse to believe it. Those who have struggle to make
sense of the new menu of options and sort reasonable hope from overblown hype.

“The emergence of cancer immunotherapy has occurred so quickly, it’s hard for
scientists, let alone physicians and patients, to keep track of it all,”
explains Dr Daniel Chen, a Stanford oncologist and researcher who helped bring
some of the new cancer breakthroughs from lab to clinic. “The tidal wave of
data is still teaching us fundamental concepts about the interaction of the
human immune system and human cancer.” It’s also bringing us important new
approaches to the treatment – and possibly the cure – of cancer. “So, this
data needs to be disseminated as quickly as possible.”

It’s estimated that nearly 40% of us will be diagnosed with cancer in our
lifetimes and, until very recently, we’ve had three basic options for dealing
with that news. We’ve had surgery for at least 3,000 years. We added radiation
therapy in 1896. Then in 1946, chemical warfare research led to the use of a
mustard gas derivative to poison cancer cells and the advent of chemotherapy.
More recently, we also started poisoning cancer through drugs that attempt to
starve tumours of nutrients or blood supply.

Those traditional “cut, burn and poison” techniques are effective in about
half of cases. It’s a laudable medical accomplishment that also leaves behind
the other half of cancer patients. According to the World Health
Organisation’s international agency for research on cancer, that translates to
9,055,027 deaths worldwide in 2018 alone.

Our usual defence against disease is our immune system. It does an excellent
job of sorting out what doesn’t belong in the body and attacking it – except
when it comes to cancer. For 100 years, the reasons behind that apparent
failure were a mystery. Jim Allison’s breakthrough was the realisation that
the immune system wasn’t ignoring cancer. Instead, cancer was taking advantage
of tricks that shut down the immune system. But what if you could block those
tricks and unleash the immune system’s killer T-cells against the disease?

The trick Allison’s immunology lab at the University of California, Berkeley,
found involved a protein on the T-cell called CTLA-4. When stimulated, CTLA-4
acted like a circuit breaker on immune response. These brakes, which he called
checkpoints, kept the cell killers from going out of control and trashing
healthy body cells. Cancer took advantage of those brakes to survive and
thrive.

In 1994, the lab developed an antibody that blocked CTLA-4. “Roughly, it’s
like taking a brick and jamming it behind the T-cell brake pedal,” explains Dr
Max Krummel, immunologist who had worked with Allison on CTLA-4. When they
injected it into cancerous mice, the antibody jammed behind CTLA-4’s brake
pedal and prevented the T-cell attack from being stopped. Instead, the T-cells
destroyed the tumours and cured the cancer.

What they had found would eventually win the Nobel. It would also fly in the
face of what every practising oncologist had been taught about cancer and how
to fight it. It took 15 years, says Krummel, before they could finally test
whether what worked in mice would translate to people.

Blocking the brakes on the immune system turned out to cause serious
toxicities in some patients. “We learned pretty quickly that immunotherapy was
not a free ride,” explains Dr Jedd Wolchok, a cancer immunotherapist and one
of the primary investigators in the clinical trials for Allison’s anti-CTLA-4
drug. “But we were also seeing some remarkable things.” For some of the
metastatic melanoma patients in the study, even terminal stage 4 patients only
days away from hospice, the drug effectively cured their cancer.

“You never forget that,” Wolchok explains. “And at the time, we really had
nothing that would work for metastatic melanoma.” In 2011, that anti-CTLA-4
drug would gain approval as ipilimumab (trade name Yervoy) for use treating
melanoma; it has since been approved to treat kidney and colorectal cancer. As
a drug, it has saved many thousands of lives. But as a proof of concept, the
success of ipilimumab proved that the immune system could, in fact, be
weaponised against cancer. It also kicked off the search for newer, better
immune checkpoints.

The first to be discovered was called PD-1. Its discoverer, Dr Tasuku Honjo of
Kyoto University, shares this year’s Nobel in medicine. PD-1 is part of a sort
of secret handshake that body cells give a T-cell, telling it: “I’m one of
you, don’t attack.” Cancers co-opted this secret handshake, tricking T-cells
into believing they were normal, healthy body cells. But that handshake could
be blocked, creating a more precise cancer-killing machine with far fewer
toxic side-effects than blocking CTLA-4.

In December 2015, the second generation of checkpoint inhibitors (called anti-
PD-1 or anti-PD-L1, depending on whether they’re blocking the T-cell or tumour
side of the handshake) was used to unleash the immune system of Jimmy Carter
and clear an aggressive cancer from his liver and brain. The news of the 91
-year-old’s miraculous recovery surprised everyone, including the former
president himself.

Groundbreaking work: Nobel prize-winning immunologist Jim Allison. Photograph:
Adolfo Chavez III/MD Anderson/EPA

For many people, “that Jimmy Carter drug”, the anti-PD-1 drug pembrolizumab,
approved in 2015 and sold as Keytruda, was the first and only thing they’d
heard about cancer immunotherapy. Keytruda is currently one of the most widely
used of the new class of drugs, approved for use against nine different types
of cancer in the US, and a smaller number in the UK, and that list is growing
rapidly, as is the number of acronyms for the dozens of new checkpoints being
tested. The immune system remains the deep ocean ecosystem of the human body.
We’ve barely begun to plumb its depths.

For researchers such as Chen and others, this is our penicillin moment in the
war on cancer. As a drug, penicillin cut infection rates, cured some bacterial
diseases and saved millions of lives. But as a scientific breakthrough, it
redefined the possible and opened a fertile new frontier for generations of
researchers. Nearly 100 years after the discovery of that one simple drug,
antibiotics are an entire class of medicines with a global impact so profound
that we take them for granted. Invisible terrors that plagued and poisoned
mankind for millennia are now casually vanquished at a high street chemist.
“We’ve only just discovered the checkpoint inhibitors,” Chen says. “So it’s
the breakthrough – we’ve just discovered our penicillin.”

Immunotherapy graphic

Seven years after the approval of that first checkpoint inhibitor, there are
reportedly 940 “new” cancer immunotherapeutic drugs being tested in the clinic
by more than half-a-million cancer patients in more than 3,000 clinical
trials, with over 1,000 more in the preclinical phase.

Those numbers are dwarfed by the number of trials testing immunotherapy
combinations or using them in concert with chemotherapy or radiation, which,
Allison notes, essentially turn the dead tumour into a cancer vaccine. It’s
hoped that, with checkpoint inhibitors releasing the brakes, the immune system
can effectively finish up what the chemotherapy starts. There are so many
ongoing trials it’s impossible to typify their stages or results, but several
have been positive. The European Society for Medical Oncology recently
announced the first modest immunotherapy success against triple negative
breast cancer, a horribly aggressive disease found primarily in younger women,
which has stubbornly resisted previous treatment options.

Nor are checkpoint inhibitors the only immunotherapy of cancer. There are
currently numerous clinical trials involving bespoke vaccines, customised to a
patient’s individual cancer. Another promising technique, known as adoptive
cell transfer, fertilises a clone army of extracted T-cells, then reinjects
them into the patient to chase down each cell; another called chimeric T-cell
therapy, or CAR-T, reengineers a patient’s killer T-cell into a sort of
robocop cancer killer, creating a startlingly powerful living drug capable of
adapting to match cancer for a lifetime. CAR-T has already wiped out certain
forms of childhood leukaemia. These are claims that simple cancer drugs can’t
make.

“The word cure can now be used in oncology,” says Dr Axel Hoos, an
immunologist and former global medical lead for the Bristol-Myers Squibb
immune-oncology programme. “It’s no longer fantasy or a cruel promise that you
can’t fulfil. We don’t yet know who will be the lucky patients who will be
cured, but we have seen cures already.”

Hype can be dangerous, just as false hope can be cruel. There’s a natural
tendency to invest too much hope in a new science, especially one that
promises to turn the tables on a disease that has, in some way, touched
everyone’s life, and sober caution is required. Right now, there are only
handful of immunotherapies available. The majority of patients respond
partially or not at all and some even develop and acquire resistance to the
disease. But the minority of cancer patients who have been shown to respond to
these drugs experience remissions measured not in extra weeks or months of
life, but in lifetimes. “Such transformative, durable responses are the unique
value proposition of the cancer immunotherapeutic approach,” Chen says. But
it’s important to note that that potential is different from a guarantee of
any one outcome for any individual patient.

T-cell transfer

And as Wolchok told me: “Immunotherapy is not a free ride.” There are the
toxicities that occur when a T-cell response in unleashed. There is also the
“economic toxicity” of bespoke cancer treatments that bring about durable
remission but cost upwards of $1m. A third concern, especially in rural or
underserved sectors, is access to both information and the drugs and drug
trials themselves. They’re out there but patients and physicians need to be
empowered to ask questions and understand their choices. Several doctors tell
me that the goal of treatment, if a cure isn’t possible, is holding on for the
next breakthrough. If and when it comes, patients and doctors need to be ready
to understand it. “After all,” says Chen, “there’s nothing more useless than
therapeutic breakthroughs against cancer that people don’t know about.”

