The list of cancers that can be treated by immunotherapy keeps growing

In immunotherapy, T-cells from a cancer patient can be genetically engineered
to be specific to a tumor. Dendritic cells (lower left) are special cells that
help the immune system recognize the cancer cells and initiate a response.
Drugs called "checkpoint inhibitors" also can spur the immune system.
(Science Source)

NEW ORLEANS — New immunotherapy drugs are showing significant and extended
effectiveness against a broadening range of cancers, including rare and
intractable tumors often caused by viruses. Researchers say these advances
suggest the treatment approach is poised to become a critical part of the
nation’s anti-cancer strategy.

Scientists reported Tuesday on two new studies showing that the medications,
which marshal the body’s own immune defenses, are now having some effect
against recurrent, difficult-to-treat head and neck cancer and an extremely
lethal skin cancer called Merkel cell carcinoma. The diseases can be caused by
viruses as well as DNA mutations, and the data show that the drugs help the
immune system to recognize and attack cancers resulting from either cause.

The new studies appear to be the first to find that "virus-driven cancers can
be amenable to treatment by immunotherapy," said Paul Nghiem, an investigator
with the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle who led the skin-
cancer study. Since viruses and other pathogens are responsible for more than
20 percent of all cancers, “these results have implications that go far
beyond" Merkel cell carcinoma.

The new data, plus research released Sunday that showed sharply higher
survival rates among advanced-melanoma patients who received immunotherapy, is
prompting growing, albeit guarded optimism among researchers attending the
American Association for Cancer Research annual meeting here. In addition to
melanoma, the infusion drugs already have been approved for use against lung
and kidney cancers.



“We are in the midst of a sea change in how we are treating cancer,” said
Louis Weiner, director of the Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center,
who wasn’t involved in the studies. “We’re really seeing the fruits of many
years of research into what drives cancer and how it interacts with the immune
system to defeat it and survive.”

The latest findings, as well as hundreds of ongoing clinical trials across the
country, suggest that immunotherapy could be beneficial for more than two
dozen kinds of cancer — and maybe many more. One of the most prominent
patients is former president Jimmy Carter, who last year was diagnosed with
advanced melanoma that had spread to his brain. He was treated with one of the
new drugs, Keytruda, as well as radiation. The combination worked so well,
causing his tumors to disappear, that he was able to stop treatment in March.

“What's happening to Jimmy Carter is happening to many, many people,” Weiner
said.

At the same time, however, researchers caution that they have a long way to go
in fully understanding the therapy and transforming it into a viable treatment
for a majority of patients. “This period for immunotherapy is comparable to
the 1960s for chemotherapy, when we were just beginning to use it,” said Roy
Jensen, director of the University of Kansas Cancer Center. “There is so much
to do and to figure out. We’re just at the start of this.”

[In-depth: Sean Parker, Silicon Valley’s bad boy genius, on his new $250m
institute for cancer immunotherapy]

Scientists don’t know why some patients benefit from immunotherapy and others
don’t. In many trials, for example, less than a third of patients have had a
positive response. Researchers think that proportion can be increased by
combining these “checkpoint inhibitor” drugs — three have been approved by the
government, with several more in development — or by adding conventional
treatments such as chemotherapy, radiation and surgery. Yet much work is
needed on how exactly to do that and on how to better comprehend cancer’s wide
range of defenses.

Researchers say that new immunotherapy drugs are showing significant
effectiveness in battling a range of cancers. (The Parker Foundation)

The research successes are emerging just as the Obama administration, as well
as private philanthropists, focus on ways to radically accelerate progress
against cancer. Former New York mayor Michael Bloomberg and tech billionaire
Sean Parker have announced that they will invest hundreds of millions of
dollars in immunotherapy research. On Wednesday, Vice President Biden will
address the conference about the Obama administration’s anti-cancer “moonshot”
initiative.



The trial on head and neck cancer involved patients who had recurrent or
metastatic squamous cell carcinoma that didn't respond to previous treatments,
including platinum-based chemotherapy. Head and neck cancer can be caused by
the human papillomavirus, or HPV. Data released as an abstract Tuesday showed
the immunotherapy drug Opdivo led to improved survival.

Previously, there was no treatment for this particular group of patients that
extended life, said Maura Gillison of the Ohio State University Comprehensive
Cancer Center, who led the study. "This is the first time in my career that I
have had an agent to reach for," she said.

The scientists divided 361 patients into two groups: One got Opdivo and the
other received chemotherapy selected by individual researchers. At the end of
a year, 36 percent of the Opdivo patients were still alive, compared with 17
percent of the chemotherapy group. The immunotherapy drug was beneficial
regardless of whether a patient had been infected with HPV.

Gillison said she hoped that the results would establish Opdivo “as a new
standard of care option for this patient population and thereby fulfill a huge
unmet need.”

With Merkel cell carcinoma, which almost always kills quickly, many more cases
are triggered by a common virus than by exposure to ultraviolet light. And in
the trial, slightly more than half of the 26 Keytruda-treated patients had a
significant reduction in their tumors. The drug prompted the immune system “to
get up out of its rocking chair” and go attack the cancer, Nghiem said. More
than 80 percent of the patients who responded are still experiencing
“excellent disease control” six months after starting treatment, and several
patients have no sign of disease, he added. The study was published online
Tuesday in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Suzanne Topalian, a co-leader of the study and associate director of Johns
Hopkins’s new Bloomberg-Kimmel Institute for Cancer Immunology, said the
results provide an “open door” for considering immunotherapy for other cancers
caused by viruses.

Stan Collender receives an immunotherapy drug at Seattle Cancer Care Alliance
as part of his treatment for rare Merkel cell carcinoma. (Robert Hood/Fred
Hutch News Service)

Stan Collender, a long-time Washington budget expert and public relations
executive, was facing the typically dire prognosis when he was diagnosed with
Merkel cell carcinoma in 2012. He had three recurrences, with tumors under his
chin and in his brain and chest. “I was convinced I was going to die,” he
recalled recently.

Then in 2015, Collender became one of the patients enrolled in Nghiem's trial.
Last spring, he began flying to Seattle every three weeks to get a 30-minute
infusion of Keytruda. A few months later, the doctors got the first scans of
his body and brain. His oncologist at Hutchinson texted him the news: “Your
scans look fantastic ...”

That was almost 10 months ago, and the 64-year-old Collender said he now feels
“miraculously well.” He has gone “from not being able to stop thinking about
my cancer to not thinking about it at all.”

Collender is hoping the benefit will last. “Is it durable? I don't know,” he
said. “I'm still a test pilot.”

Read more:

IN DEPTH: Sean Parker, Silicon Valley’s bad boy genius, wants to kick the *!$%
out of cancer

$250 million, 300 scientists and 40 labs: Sean Parker’s revolutionary project
to ‘solve’ cancer

Big-name scientists aim to make cancer a chronic illness

Bloomberg, others make big donation to Hopkins for immunotherapy research

7 ways to avoid cancer's "financial toxicity"

Like our Health & Wellness page on Facebook for more science news about the
ins and outs of the human body and mind, essays and advice. You can sign up
here for our newsletter.



















