Cancer Immunotherapy - Abramson Cancer Center

Using a patient's own cells to fight disease
CAR-T cell therapy, a form of immunotherapy, was first developed by Penn Medicine and was the first gene therapy to be approved by the FDA. It retrains healthy cells to hunt down and eliminate cancer cells. Penn Medicine is leading the world in delivering the promise of immunotherapy to you.

The Story of Immunotherapy at Penn Medicine

The groundwork for immunotherapy began in 2003 with the mapping of the human
genome. For the first time, we knew which genes affected which traits in the
body. But actually changing those genes would require something more.

Over the next decade, Penn Medicine built on this knowledge, creating the
first FDA-approved immunotherapy, called CAR-T cell therapy. CAR-T cell
therapy is a groundbreaking technique for retraining the body’s T cells that
Penn Medicine has used to treat hundreds of patients with cancer. It was first
approved for treating leukemia, a type of blood cancer.

Today, Penn Medicine's world-leading researchers are developing new
immunotherapies to treat cancer, as well as other diseases, including multiple
sclerosis (MS), Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, infectious diseases and more.

Hunting Cancer from the Inside

Cancer spreads quickly for a simple reason: The body can’t see it. Cancer
cells start out as healthy cells, so when they mutate, they still look like
healthy cells to the immune system. They’re camouflaged. The immune cells
never attack.

With CAR-T cell therapy, we teach immune cells to recognize cancer cells. We
take some of the body’s T cells (a type of white blood cell) and genetically
retrain them to find a specific chunk of biological code — the cancer
fingerprint. When the T cells are returned to the body, they hunt down and
destroy all cells with that fingerprint. These engineered "hunter cells" live
on in the body as a permanent defense long after the cancer is gone.

First developed by Penn Medicine, CAR-T cell therapy is now in clinical trials
around the world in thousands of permutations for many diseases. At Penn
Medicine's Abramson Cancer Center alone, clinical trials have already led to
groundbreaking, FDA-approved therapies for lymphoma and leukemia. We hope to
see similar results soon for glioblastoma, the most aggressive form of brain
cancer.

Although still in its infancy, CAR-T represents a turning point in the history
of human medicine, a genuine revolution in our approach to disease.

Welcome to the ImmunoRevolution.

Additional Cutting-Edge Immunotherapy Treatments at Penn
Our dynamic research program is always growing. In addition to CAR-T cell therapy, we focus on other types of immunotherapy research, such as vaccine therapy and checkpoint inhibitors.


