Cancer Immunotherapy

Is your current in vitro assay truly predictive of in vivo outcomes?

In addition to being robust and simple, the ideal in vitro assay closely
mimics activity in vivo. The ideal in vitro assay  must also predict long term
behavior in animal models, and ultimately, in human patients.

To gain a more complete view of cancer cell killing, the xCELLigence® Real
Time Cell Analysis (RTCA) technology captures dynamic cell behavior that can
be missed by labor-intensive endpoint methods.



Reap the benefits of game-changing predictivity with xCELLigence® Real-Time
Cell Analysis (RTCA) instruments:

Label-Free: No 51Cr, no luciferase, no dyes…NO PROBLEM
Astonishingly Simple Workflow: Plate target cells, add effector cells, and start reading
  Read an entire 96-well plate in 15 seconds
  Run up to 6 plates independently, with no scheduling conflicts
  Monitor target cell killing continuously from seconds to days
Exquisite Sensitivity: Monitor target cell killing at low, physiologically relevant effector:target ratios
Diverse Effector Cells and Molecules: TIL, NK, CART, TCR, checkpoint inhibitors, BiTEs, etc.
Quantitative, Real-Time Kinetics: Highly accurate and highly reproducible 



How is xCELLigence® RTCA used for cell killing assays?

The xCELLigence® Real-Time Cell Analysis (RTCA) instruments utilize patented
microtiter plates (E-Plates®) which contain gold biosensors embedded in the
bottom of each well. These biosensors continuously and non-invasively monitor
changes in cell number, cell size, and cell-substrate attachment quality.

| Step 1: Adherent target cells (i.e. tumor cells) are first seeded in E-Plate
wells. The biosensor signal, which is plotted as a unitless parameter called
“Cell Index”, increases as cells attach and proliferate and then plateaus as
cells approach 100% confluence (see data plot below).  
---|---  
| Step 2: When added subsequently, non-adherent effector cells (i.e. immune
cells) in suspension do not cause signal changes in and of themselves (due to
lack of adherence to the gold biosensors).  
| Step 3: If effector cells induce the destruction of the target adherent
tumor cells, the corresponding cytolytic activity can be sensitively and
precisely detected. The continuous acquisition of data for each well of an
E-Plate enables the generation of real-time killing curves for multiple
conditions simultaneously.  
Step 4: Using an intuitive graphical interface designed specifically for the
immuno-oncologist, the xIMT Software monitors cell killing in real-time (Left
plot), followed by calculation of specific parameters such as %cytolysis
(Right plot), IC50, KT50, etc.  
  


Featured xCELLigence RTCA systems for immune cell killing assays:

Cancer Immunotherapy Supporting Information:

Research Presentation Videos:

