Cancer Immunotherapy - Online Course

0:23Skip to 0 minutes and 23 secondsBEN WILLCOX: I'm Ben Wilcox. I'm a
Professor of Molecular Immunology at the University of Birmingham and also
director of the University's Cancer Immunology and Immunotherapy Centre, or
CIIC. My own research is focused on understanding how receptors on the surface
of our immune cells enable them to recognise signs of abnormality on target
cells, and on how we can exploit this to find new ways to treat the disease

0:45Skip to 0 minutes and 45 secondsHEATHER LONG: I'm Dr. Heather Long. I'm a
lecturer and immunologist based at the University of Birmingham. My research
focuses on understanding how the immune system can control viruses associated
with cancer.

0:56Skip to 0 minutes and 56 secondsGARY MIDDLETON: Hello, my name is Gary
Middleton. I'm a Professor of Medical Oncology at the University Hospital
Birmingham. I've also got a contract with the University of Birmingham. My two
main clinical interests are colorectal cancer and lung cancer, two big
killers, still, and particular, preclinical and translational interests, that
again, really are in immunobiology, particularly in understanding what sort of
cells stop the immune system from working.

1:19Skip to 1 minute and 19 secondsBEN WILLCOX: In Birmingham, we are uniquely
placed to explain how the immune system can be used to treat cancer. Right at
the heart of the campus is the Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, one of the
largest teaching hospitals in Europe. Linked to the hospital is the
University's Cancer Immunology and Immunotherapy Centre-- or CIIC, as we call
it-- a collaborative grouping of scientists and clinicians specifically
focused on understanding the science behind these new therapies and on
developing new immunotherapies to fight the disease. Birmingham is also
fortunate to host the Cancer Research UK Clinical Trials Unit, one of the
largest clinical trials units for cancer in the whole of Europe.

1:55Skip to 1 minute and 55 secondsHEATHER LONG: Cancer affects all of us. It
is very likely that you know someone who has died of the disease. In the UK
alone, up to one in two people are predicted to be diagnosed with cancer in
their lifetime. And although great advances are being made in cancer
treatment, with over 50% of those diagnosed likely to survive, there is still
a long way to go. The disease kills over 12 million people worldwide every
year. We desperately need new ways to tackle cancer.

2:23Skip to 2 minutes and 23 secondsBEN WILLCOX: The idea of harnessing the
power of the immune system to fight cancer has actually been around for a long
time. But until recently, it has had limited impact in terms of how we
actually treat most cancer patients. That picture is now changing
dramatically. Clinical trial results over the last five years or so have
marked this area out as a real turning point in the fight against cancer, and
one of the most exciting, fast-moving areas in the whole of clinical medicine.

2:50Skip to 2 minutes and 50 secondsGARY MIDDLETON: I can remember sitting in
the audience at our main American meeting in 2012, when the first stage was
presented, and I was blown away by this. These were patients where we were
using treatments to block-- something that stops the immune system from
working in cancer. And we were seeing some really amazing results.

3:06Skip to 3 minutes and 6 secondsBEN WILLCOX: The idea of exploiting the
patient's own immune system to target their tumour, which is such a different
approach to conventional anti-cancer treatments, has turned from a pipe dream
into a therapeutic reality. In this course, we will explain some of the key
ideas behind cancer immunotherapy. What is the immune system? And what has the
immune system got to do with cancer? How do the new cancer immunotherapies
work? How can we engineer smart immune cells to target cancer cells? Can we
personalise immunotherapy approaches to individual patients?

3:39Skip to 3 minutes and 39 secondsHEATHER LONG: If you're interested in how
the immune system can recognise cancer, how new immunotherapies work, what is
the future of cancer immunotherapy, then sign up for our free course.

