The main types of immunotherapy can be divided into treatments using
monoclonal antibodies, nonspecific immunotherapies, and cancer vaccines.

Antibodies are naturally produced by the body when it detects harmful viruses,
bacteria and other substances that cause disease.Antibodies fight infection or
disease by targeting parts of cancer cells to alter their growth. Monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) are made in a laboratory to work in the same way. They are
usually given intravenously.

Monoclonal antibodies may be designed to change cancer cells in different
ways:

Antibodies can attach to cancer cells to ‘flag’ your immune system to destroy that cell.
Antibodies can slow the growth of cancer cells by blocking parts of the cell that enable them to grow.
Radioimmunotherapy uses antibodies to deliver radiotherapy to cancer cells without damaging healthy cells. This is done by attaching radioactive molecules to antibodies in a medical laboratory. These kinds of antibodies can also be used to diagnose some cancers by flagging where cancer cells exist in the body.
The antibody may carry medicine, such as chemotherapy, directly to cancer cells.

Nonspecific immunotherapies refer to the use of cytokines (proteins produced
by white blood cells to control immune responses) to help the body’s immune
system destroy cancer cells. Nonspecific immunotherapies are typically given
in combination with other cancer treatments, such as chemotherapy or
radiation therapy.

Types of cytokines that are made in a laboratory to treat cancer include:

interferons, which can help the immune system to slow the growth of cancer cells
interleukins, which can increase the production white blood cells and antibodies to fight cancer
hematopoietic growth factors, which may be used to counteract some side effects of chemotherapy.

Cancer vaccines are medicines that trigger the body’s immune system to detect
cancer cells.There are 2 types of cancer vaccines. Preventive (prophylactic)
vaccines may prevent cancer cells from developing; they are only useful for
cancer known to be caused by infections. Treatment (therapeutic) vaccines
prompt the immune system to fight existing cancer cells. Clinical trials
continue into different types of therapeutic vaccines.

Possible side effects of immunotherapy include:

fever
chills
weakness
dizziness
headache
nausea, vomiting and diarrhea
muscle or joint aches
changes in weight
low blood pressure
fatigue
breathing difficulties
allergic reactions (rarely).

You may also experience skin reactions at the site of injection if
immunotherapy is given intravenously. These include:

pain
swelling
soreness
redness
itchiness
rashes.

For more information about immunotherapy and its side effects you should talk
to your doctor or visit Treatment side effects.

