Accelerating Cancer Immunotherapy Research

The work of ACIR and the Fritsch Foundation is so beautifully targeted on
something that has the potential of being truly useful even in the earliest
stages. What a great idea!" — John Petricciani, MD President of the
International Alliance for Biological Standardization (IABS); Former Director
of the Center for Biologics at FDA and former Chief Medical Officer of the
Biologicals Unit at WHO

Our understanding of the interaction between the immune system and cancer
cells, and also the ways to exploit this interaction clinically, is growing
faster than ever before. At present, there is no reliable single source of
information that can help clinicians and researchers in this field stay up-to-
date, and by filling this gap, the Fritsch Foundation and ACIR.org initiative
will facilitate the development of effective cancer immunotherapies for an
increasing number of patient groups." — Ton Schumacher, PhD Deputy Director of
the Netherlands Cancer Institute; Professor of Immunotechnology at Leiden
University, The Netherlands; Chief Scientific Officer of Kite Pharma EU; SU2C-
CRI Immunotherapy Dream Team member

Cancer Immunotherapy is providing patients with novel and durable treatments
and the number of available therapies keeps growing. The mission of the
Fritsch Foundation and its ACIR.org website—to accelerate the pace by which
the field develops through mapping out the research and clinical landscapes
and keeping track of key advances in the field—is an initiative that has my
total support!!" — Robert D. Schreiber, PhD Alumni Endowed Professor of
Pathology and Immunology and Professor of Molecular Microbiology at Washington
University School of Medicine, MO; Director of the Washington University
Center for Human Immunology and Immunotherapy Programs; Coleader of the Tumor
Immunology Program of Washington University's Siteman Comprehensive Cancer
Center; Associate Director of the Scientific Advisory Board to the Cancer
Research Institute

I fully support the important new initiative of the Fritsch Foundation. The
field of cancer immunotherapy grows at an exciting pace. Staying on top of
foundational discoveries in the field, which will be conveniently processed on
ACIR.org, is key for coming up with important new hypotheses about
immunotherapeutic cancer treatment strategies." — Glenn Dranoff, MD, PhD
Global Head of Immuno-Oncology, Novartis Institutes of BioMedical Research

I fully endorse the mission of the Fritsch Foundation and ACIR.org to provide
a weekly synopsis of the scientific literature that bears on the field of
cancer immunotherapy. The value and impact of this approach has been clearly
demonstrated by a program I have been involved in as a member of the
scientific advisory board of the Prize4Life Foundation, which is dedicated to
curing the neurodegenerative disease ALS (Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis or Lou
Gherig’s disease). ALS Forum, a joint effort between Prize4Life and the
Alzheimer’s Research Forum provides ALS research summaries and well as links
to ALS review articles as well as other content related to clinical trials.
This program is widely used by the ALS research community to keep up to date
with the rapidly moving scientific literature on ALS." — Tom Maniatis, PhD
Chairman of the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics at the
Columbia University Medical Center (CUMC) in New York, and Director of the
University wide Columbia Precision Medicine Initiative (CPMI)

The Fritsch Foundation and ACIR.org have identified a great way to meet the
critical need of researchers and clinicians everywhere to stay up to date with
the literature in the fast moving and life-saving field of cancer
immunotherapy. This will be a fine living tribute to your son that has the
potential to help many future cancer victims!" — James S. Economou, MD, PhD
Beaumont Professor of Surgery, Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular
Genetics, and Molecular and Medical Pharmacology at the University of
California, Los Angeles (UCLA)

At a time when immunotherapy is being used for the treatment of increasing
numbers of patients with cancer, there is a critical need to provide reliable
information to patients, physicians and researchers. Key limitations to get to
the reliable sources of information are the large amount of data that is being
generated and published, the multiple clinical trials available and the
differences in the ability of patients to access these therapies. Given these
limitations, I welcome the efforts by The Fritsch Foundation and ACIR.org to
make sense out of all this data and provide a reliable and timely source of
information for the whole community of patients and researchers. They have
full time scientists reviewing the data and pointing to the most important
advances in the field of cancer immunotherapy." — Antoni Ribas, MD, PhD
Professor of Medicine, Surgery, Molecular and Medical Pharmacology at the
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA); Director of the Tumor Immunology
Program at the Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center (JCCC); Director of the
Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy (PICI) Center at UCLA; Chair of the
Melanoma Committee at SWOG

The field of cancer immunotherapy has exploded in recent years, drawing on the
creativity and experience of scientists, clinicians, and patient advocates
from many different backgrounds. ACIR does an incredible job of helping bring
all of these groups together toward a common goal of eliminating cancer by
disseminating important research findings to the community at large." — James
Allison, PhD Professor and Chair, Department of Immunology; Executive
Director, Immunotherapy Platform; Director, Parker Institute for Cancer
Immunotherapy; and Vivian L. Smith Distinguished Chair-Immunology at the
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. 2018 Nobel Prize in Physiology
or Medicine.

As a researcher bridging the science and clinical translation of the exciting
discoveries of cancer immunotherapy, I applaud the efforts of ACIR.org to help
me, my post-docs and students, and my colleagues keep up to date on all the
key innovations driving this field. New knowledge continually refines our
current thinking and ACIR.org keeps that new knowledge fresh and at our
fingertips." — Catherine Wu, MD, PhD Professor of Medicine, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School; Institute Member, Broad Institute of
Harvard and MIT

I am pleased to voice my support for the mission of ACIR.org to keep cancer
immunotherapy researchers up to date with the current advancements in the
field. Given the magnitude of new information emerging from this field, I
particularly appreciate their efforts to both identify and highlight the key
advancements each week and to distill the new information to key take-away
points that can be easily and quickly grasped." — Nir Hacohen, PhD Professor
of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Director, MGH Center for Cancer
Immunology; Institute Member, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT

