The Basics of Cancer Immunotherapy

This book provides patients and their physicians (especially “non-oncologist”
health care providers) with a clear and concise introduction to cancer
immunotherapy, which, unlike traditional forms of cancer therapy, acts by
boosting the patient’s own immune system to fight cancer. The unique features
of cancer immunotherapy make its management, monitoring and side-effects
different from those of traditional cancer therapy. Especially novel are the
side effects of cancer immunotherapy, necessitating greater awareness for both
patients and physicians in order to minimize complications of therapy.

The patient-friendly, concise, easy-to-understand, and up-to-date knowledge
presented in this book will inform patients about the benefits and risks of
cancer immunotherapy, and help them and their care providers to understand how
immunotherapy would control their unique disease.   Researchers and academic
professionals in the field of cancer immunotherapy will also find clear and
useful information to help them communicate with patients or address
unresolved problems.  Some key features of the book are:

Expertise. All editors and authors are scientists and oncologists specializing
in cancer immunotherapy, and are involved in scientific discovery from the
early stage of immune-checkpoint inhibitors to today’s daily patient care.
Their insights, expertise and experience guarantee the high quality and
authority in the science, medicine and practice of cancer immunotherapy.  

Patient-friendly. This book is written for cancer patients in order to meet
their needs when considering immunotherapy. As an educational tool, this book
will help the reader balance the risks and benefits based on both science and
clinical facts, and therefore to make the best choice in receiving or
withdrawing from immunotherapy.  

Disease Specificity. Cancer is a complicated disease involving multiple stages
and pathology. Its response to immunotherapy is individualized and varies
depending on cancer types. The authors’ expertise in treating different types
of cancers, including melanoma, lung, kidney,  bladder, and lymphoma, provides
disease-specific insights in applying immunotherapy to each disease.  

