Nivolumab - Wikipedia

Nivolumab, marketed as Opdivo, is a medication used to treat cancer. It
is used as a first line treatment for inoperable or metastatic melanoma in
combination with ipilimumab if the cancer does not have a mutation in BRAF,
as a second-line treatment following treatment with ipilimumab and if the
cancer has a mutation in BRAF, with a BRAF inhibitor, as a second-line
treatment for squamous non-small cell lung cancer, and as a second-line
treatment for renal cell carcinoma.

It had not been tested in pregnant women but based on the mechanism of action
and animal studies, is probably toxic to the fetus; it is not known if it is
secreted in breast milk. Side effects include severe immune-related
inflammation of the lungs, colon, liver, kidneys, and thyroid, and there are
effects on skin, central nervous system, the heart, and the digestive
system.

It is a human IgG4 anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody. Nivolumab works as a
checkpoint inhibitor, blocking a signal that would have prevented activated T
cells from attacking the cancer, thus allowing the immune system to clear the
cancer. It was discovered at Medarex, developed by Medarex and Ono
Pharmaceutical, and brought to market by Bristol-Myers Squibb (which acquired
Medarex in 2009) and Ono.

Medical use

Nivolumab is used as a first line treatment for inoperable or metastatic
melanoma in combination with ipilimumab if the cancer does not have a mutation
in BRAF, and as a second-line treatment for inoperable or metastatic
melanoma following treatment of ipilimumab and, if the cancer has a BRAF
mutation, a BRAF inhibitor. It is also used to treat metastatic squamous
non-small cell lung cancer with progression with or after platinum-based
drugs. It also used as a second-line treatment for renal cell carcinoma
after anti-angiogenic treatment has failed.

FDA has approved nivolumab for primary or metastatic urothelial carcinoma, the
most common form of bladder cancer. It can be prescribed for locally advanced
or metastatic form of the condition that experience disease progression during
or following platinum-containing chemotherapy or have progression within 12
months of neoadjuvant or adjuvant treatment with platinum-containing
chemotherapy.

Nivolumab was not tested in pregnant women but based on how the drug works and
on animal studies, it is likely to cause harm to a baby; it is not known if
nivolumab is secreted in breast milk.

Nivolumab, and other PD-1 inhibitors, appear to be effective in people with
brain metastases and autoimmune diseases.

Side effects

The drug label contains warnings with regard to increased risks of severe
immune-mediated inflammation of the lungs, the colon, the liver, the kidneys
(with accompanying kidney dysfunction), as well as immune-mediated
hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism.

In clinical trials for melanoma, the following side effects occurred in more
than 10% of subjects and more frequently than with chemotherapy alone: rash
and itchy skin, cough, upper respiratory tract infections, and peripheral
edema. Other clinically important side effects with less than 10% frequency
were ventricular arrhythmia, inflammation of parts of the eye (iridocyclitis),
infusion-related reactions, dizziness, peripheral and sensory neuropathy,
peeling skin, erythema multiforme, vitiligo, and psoriasis.

In clinical trials for lung cancer, the following side effects occurred in
more than 10% of subjects and more frequently than with chemotherapy alone:
fatigue, weakness, edema, fever, chest pain, generalized pain, shortness of
breath, cough, muscle and joint pain, decreased appetite, abdominal pain,
nausea and vomiting, constipation, weight loss, rash, and itchy skin.

Levels of electrolytes and blood cells counts were also disrupted.

Pharmacokinetics

Based on data from 909 patients, the terminal half-life of nivolumab is 26.7
days and steady-state concentrations were reached by 12 weeks when
administered at 3 mg/kg every 2 weeks.:29 Age, gender, race, baseline LDH,
PD-L1 expression, tumor type, tumor size, renal impairment, and mild hepatic
impairment do not affect clearance of the drug.:30

Mechanism of action

T cells protect the body from cancer by killing certain cancer cells. But
cancer cells evolve proteins to protect themselves from T cells. Nivolumab
blocks those protective proteins. Thus, the T cells can kill the cancer
cells. This is an example of immune checkpoint blockade.

PD-1 is a protein on the surface of activated T cells. If another molecule,
called programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 or programmed cell death 1 ligand 2
(PD-L1 or PD-L2), binds to PD-1, the T cell becomes inactive. This is one way
that the body regulates the immune system, to avoid an overreaction. Many
cancer cells make PD-L1, which inhibits T cells from attacking the tumor.
Nivolumab blocks PD-L1 from binding to PD-1, allowing the T cell to
work. PD-L1 is expressed on 40–50% of melanomas and has limited
expression otherwise in most visceral organs with the exception of respiratory
epithelium and placental tissue.

Physical properties

Nivolumab is a fully human monoclonal immunoglobulin G4 antibody to PD-1.
The gamma 1 heavy chain is 91.8% unmodified human design while the kappa light
chain is 98.9%.

History

Nivolumab was created by scientists at Medarex using Medarex's transgenic mice
with a humanized immune system; the discovery and in vitro characterization of
the antibody, originally called MDX-1106, was published (much later) in
2014. Medarex licensed Japanese rights to nivolumab to Ono Pharmaceutical
in 2005. Bristol-Myers Squibb acquired Medarex in 2009 for $2.4B, largely
on the strength of its checkpoint inhibitor program.

Promising clinical trial results made public in 2012 caused excitement among
industry analysts and in the mainstream media; PD-1 was being avidly pursued
as a biological target at that time, with companies including Merck with
pembrolizumab (Keytruda), Roche (via its subsidiary Genentech) with
atezolizumab, GlaxoSmithKline in collaboration with the Maryland biotech
company Amplimmune; and Teva in collaboration with the Israeli biotech company
CureTech competing.

Ono received approval from Japanese regulatory authorities to use nivolumab to
treat unresectable melanoma in July 2014, which was the first regulatory
approval of a PD-1 inhibitor anywhere in the world.

Merck received its first FDA approval for its PD-1 inhibitor, pembrolizumab
(Keytruda), in September 2014.

Nivolumab received FDA approval for the treatment of melanoma in December
2014. In April 2015, the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use
of the European Medicines Agency recommended approval of Nivolumab for
metastatic melanoma as a monotherapy.

In March 2015, the US FDA approved it for the treatment of squamous cell lung
cancer.

On 19 June 2015 the European Commission granted a marketing authorisation
valid throughout the European Union.

In November 2015, the FDA approved nivolumab as a second-line treatment for
renal cell carcinoma after having granted the application breakthrough therapy
designation, fast track designation, and priority review status.

In May 2016, the FDA approved nivolumab for the treatment of patients with
classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) who have relapsed or progressed after
autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (auto-HSCT) and post-
transplantation brentuximab vedotin.

On December 20, 2017, the FDA granted approval to nivolumab for adjuvant
treatment of melanoma with involvement of lymph nodes or for metastatic
disease with complete resection.

On April 16, 2018, the FDA granted approval to nivolumab in combination with
ipilimumab for the first-line treatment of intermediate and poor risk advanced
renal cell carcinoma patients.

On June 15, 2018, China’s Drug Administration approved nivolumab, the
country’s first immuno-oncology and the first PD-1 therapy.

Research

Hodgkin's lymphoma

In Hodgkin's lymphoma, Reed-Sternberg cells harbor amplification of chromosome
9p24.1, which encodes PD-L1 and PD-L2 and leads to their constitutive
expression. In a small clinical study published in 2015, nivolumab elicited an
objective response rate of 87% in a cohort of 20 patients.

Biomarkers

Amplification of chromosome 9p24 may serve as a predictive biomarker in
Hodgkin’s lymphoma.

Each company pursuing mAbs against PD-1 as drugs developed assays to measure
PD-L1 levels as a potential biomarker using their drugs as the analyte-
specific reagent in the assay. BMS partnered with Dako on a nivolumab-based
assay. However, as of 2015 the complexity of the immune response had hindered
efforts to identify people who would be likely to respond well to PD-1
inhibitors; in particular PD-L1 levels appear to be dynamic and modulated
by several factors, and efforts to correlate PD-L1 levels before or during
treatment with treatment response or duration of response had failed to reveal
any useful correlations as of 2015.

Lung cancer

In 2016, BMS announced the results of a clinical trial in which nivolumab
failed to achieve its endpoint and was no better than traditional chemotherapy
at treating newly diagnosed lung cancer. BMS went on to attempt to win
approval for a combination therapy against lung cancer which included
nivolumab and BMS's older drug ipilimumab. The application was withdrawn in
early 2019 following disappointing clinical trial data.

Infusion times of 60 minutes and 30 minutes appear to have similar
pharmacokinetics (absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination) of
the treatment.