Nobel Lectures in Cancer Immunotherapy
Nobel laureates in Physiology or Medicine James P. Allison, PhD, and Tasuku Honjo, MD, PhD, delivered their lectures "Immune Checkpoint Blockade in Cancer Therapy: New insights, opportunities, and prospects for cures" and "Serendipities of acquired immunity," respectively, in Solna, Sweden on Friday, Dec. 7, 2018. Watch their lectures and then read articles from additional leading experts in JITC's Immune Checkpoint Therapy collection.

Announcement: Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer's First Impact Factor
Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer (JITC) received its first Journal Impact Factor of 8.374 on June 26, 2018. 

JITC ranks in the top 8 percent of all journals published in the categories of oncology and immunology of Journal Citation Reports (Clarivate Analytics, 2018).

Aims and scope
Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer (JITC) is the open access, peer reviewed journal that publishes on all aspects of tumor immunology and cancer immunotherapy, aiming to enrich communication and advance scientific understanding in this rapidly evolving field. Topics of interest range across the basic science-translational-clinical spectrum and include tumor-host interactions, the tumor microenvironment, animal models, predictive and prognostic immune biomarkers, novel pharmaceutical and cellular therapies, vaccines, combination immune-based therapies, and immune-related toxicity. 

Tbet-positive regulatory T cells accumulate in oropharyngeal cancers with ongoing tumor-specific type 1 T cell responses

Hyperspectral cell sociology reveals spatial tumor-immune cell interactions associated with lung cancer recurrence

Avelumab in patients with previously treated metastatic melanoma: phase 1b results from the JAVELIN Solid Tumor trial

Chimeric tumor modeling reveals role of partial PDL1 expression in resistance to virally induced immunotherapy

Tumor microenvironment modulation enhances immunologic benefit of chemoradiotherapy

This discount must be requested prior to submission by contacting JITCEditor@sitcancer.org. Upon receiving a waiver code from this contact, authors must select option #2 on the View Publication Charges page to enter the code in the “BioMed Central Account Number” box.

Society affiliation
Learn more about the Society for Immunotherapy of Cancer’s mission to improve cancer patient outcomes by advancing the science, development and application of cancer immunology and immunotherapy at SITC Cancer Immunotherapy CONNECT.

Immune monitoring technology primers
Reviewed by the members of the SITC Immune Biomarkers Task Force, these brief primers highlight important aspects of both standardized and novel technologies available in clinical trial settings.

SITC Cancer immunotherapy guidelines
Developed by experts in the treatment of specific types of cancer, each consensus statement provides key indicators to help practicing oncologists determine when and how to best use immunotherapy to treat their patients. View post-publication updates from the Society for Immunotherapy of Cancer on SITC CONNECT.
