Skip to main content
Check Your Symptoms
Find A Doctor
Find Lowest Drug Prices
HealthA-Z
Health A-Z
Health A-Z
Common Conditions
ADD/ADHD
Allergies
Arthritis
Cancer
Cold, Flu & Cough
Depression
Diabetes
Eye Health
Heart Disease
Lung Disease
Pain Management
Sexual Conditions
Skin Problems
Sleep Disorders
View All
Resources
Symptom Checker
Expert Blogs and Interviews
Podcasts
Message Boards
Questions & Answers
Insurance Guide
Find a Doctor
Featured Topics
Slideshow
Get Help for Migraine Relief
Slideshow
Things That Can Hurt Your Joints
Drugs & Supplements
Drugs & Supplements
Drugs & Supplements
Find & Review
Drugs
Supplements
Tools
Manage Your Medications
Pill Identifier
Check for Interactions
Drug Basics & Safety
Commonly Abused Drugs
Taking Meds When Pregnant
Featured Topics
Slideshow
Vitamins You Need as You Age
Slideshow
Supplements for Better Digestion
Living
Healthy
Living Healthy
Living Healthy
Diet, Food & Fitness
Diet & Weight Management
Weight Loss & Obesity
Food & Recipes
Fitness & Exercise
View All
Beauty & Balance
Healthy Beauty
Health & Balance
Sex & Relationships
Oral Care
View All
Living Well
Women's Health
Men's Health
Aging Well
Healthy Sleep
Healthy Teens
Fit Kids
Featured Topics
Slideshow
15 Ways to Keep Your Mind Young
Slideshow
Tips to Help You Stop Wasting Time
Family & Pregnancy
Family & Pregnancy
Family & Pregnancy
All About Pregnancy
Getting Pregnant
First Trimester
Second Trimester
Third Trimester
View All
Parenting Guide
Newborn & Baby
Children's Health
Children's Vaccines
Raising Fit Kids
View All
Pet Care Essentials
Healthy Cats
Healthy Dogs
View All
Featured Topics
Expert Blog
Dangers After Childbirth -- What to Watch For
Quiz
Tips for Success ... Things Every Teen Should Know
News & Experts
News & Experts
News & Experts
Health News
Plague Cases Confirmed -- What You Need to Know
Blood Test May Show Early Warning of Alzheimer's
Will Healthy Seniors Benefit From Daily Aspirin?
Sit Less, Live Longer?
Why Your Heart Needs a Good Night's Sleep
Experts & Community
Message Boards
Expert Blogs
News Center
Featured Topics
WebMD Investigates
Lives Lost When ERs Break the Law
Newsletters
Sign Up to Receive Our Free Newsletters
Mobile Apps
Subscriptions
Sign In
Subscribe
My Profile
My Tools
My WebMD Pages
My Account
Sign Out
Cancer Topics
Bladder Cancer
Brain Cancer
Breast Cancer
Cervical Cancer
Colorectal Cancer
Leukemia & Lymphoma
Lung Cancer
Melanoma
Multiple Myeloma
Ovarian Cancer
Pancreatic Cancer
Prostate Cancer
Cancer Guide
Overview
Diagnosis
Treatment
Chemotherapy
Immunotherapy
CAM
Living With
Remission
Immunotherapy for Cancer
How Immunotherapy Works
Types of Immunotherapy
Combination Care
Is It Right for You?
Risks and Benefits
Side Effects
Boosting Your Immunity
If It Doesn't Work
Graphic: How Immunotherapy Works
More Cancer Resources
News
Reference
Slideshows
Quizzes
Videos
Questions & Answers
Message Board
Find an Oncologist
Cancer Tests
Cancer Treatments
Cancer Remission
Cancer A-Z
Cancer
Reference
Chemo: 3 Things You Need to Know
How Immunotherapy for Cancer Works
Articles OnImmunotherapy for Cancer
Immunotherapy for Cancer
Immunotherapy for Cancer - How Immunotherapy for Cancer Works
How Immunotherapy Works
Types of Immunotherapy
Combination Care
Is It Right for You?
Risks and Benefits
Side Effects
Boosting Your Immunity
If It Doesn't Work
Graphic: How Immunotherapy Works
For many types of cancer, immunotherapy, sometimes called biologic therapy, has been a game changer. Why? It could improve your life and extend your years far longer than other treatments.
What Is Immunotherapy?
If you have bad allergies, you may have gotten allergy shots for the sniffles and red eyes. Each shot had a very small amount of the allergen -- the thing that caused your problems.
The shots put your immune system on alert, but they didn’t make you sick. Over time, your doses got bigger. That helped you build a tolerance to the allergen.
In other words, you became immune.
Those allergy shots were a type of immunotherapy. So are vaccines for diseases like measles and mumps.
How does that relate to cancer?
The disease starts when one cell in your body goes rogue. Researchers hope immunotherapy treatment will harness the power of your body’s natural defenses to fight cancer cells, just like it would with a germ, virus, or allergy.
One approach is to tell your system to stage a full-out assault on cancer cells. Another is to try to make your defenses stronger.
What Are the Types of Cancer Immunotherapy?
Researchers are exploring many ways to help your immune system recognize and destroy cancer cells.
Adoptive T-Cell Immunotherapy
This is designed to boost your key immune cells. Basically, researchers remove T cells (white blood cells in your immune system) from your tumor, then figure out which ones are fighting the growth the most. Once that’s known, scientists genetically engineer the genes in those cells to be stronger and return them to your system through an IV.
This approach shows a lot of promise in the treatment of many different types of cancer.
Car T-cell therapy:
Car T-cell therapy is a type of adoptive T-cell immunotherapy. This treatment is sometimes used to treat acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children and young adults and certain types of B – cell lymphoma in adults that haven’t gotten better with other treatments.
Cancer vaccines work like many others. They generally fall into two groups:
Continued
Preventive vaccines have a lot in common with traditional types. Both work with a substance called an antigen, which gives your immune system a nudge. A preventive cancer vaccine is used against the human papillomavirus (HPV). That causes cervical, anal and other types of cancer.
Treatment vaccines try to help your T cells pick out and destroy specific cancers. Shots can also be designed to increase the number of antibodies (cells that destroy invaders) in your system. For example, a treatment vaccine for advanced pancreatic cancer is being studied in clinical trials.
Checkpoint Inhibitors
Our immune system has a set of brakes -- or checkpoints -- that stop it from killing healthy cells.
Sometimes, cancer cells take advantage of this and hide from your defense, almost disguising themselves as normal cells. That way, your system doesn’t see the cancer cell as an invader.
These drugs help your immune system see the cancer as a problem, and fight it.
Checkpoint inhibitors are in clinical trials for many different cancers. Some people with metastatic melanoma, lung, bladder, kidney, head and neck cancer and Hodgkin’s lymphoma are being treated with them.
Monoclonal antibodies are molecules made in a laboratory. These antibodies are designed to recognize and attack cancer cells.
Your immune system is good at spotting things that can cause harm, but it doesn’t always see cancer cells as bad news.
Monoclonal antibodies help you mount an offense. They attach to cancer cells. Then, like a beacon, they make those cells more visible to your immune system, so it can fight them better.
Some monoclonal antibodies can have chemotherapy drugs or radioactive substances attached to them and can help stop the growth of cancer cells.
These molecules treat many different types of cancer. Researchers are studying their possibilities for treating many more.
What’s the Future of Immunotherapy?
Researchers are trying to find ways to help your immune system fight cancer, and to better understand your defenses and how they protect you.
Science is also looking at how to combine immunotherapy with other treatments to make them work even better. Researchers are even looking into what happens when you pair two types of immunotherapy.
One big question that still remains: Why does this -- like traditional treatments -- work for one patient, but not another?
Study -- and with it, discovery -- goes on.
WebMD Medical Reference
Reviewed by Laura J. Martin, MD on November 11, 2018
Sources
SOURCES:
Mayo Clinic: “Allergy Shots.”
American Cancer Society: “What is Immunotherapy.”
National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute: “Vaccine Fact Sheet.”
Mayo Clinic: “What is A Monoclonal Antibody?”
Mayo Clinic: “How do Monoclonal Antibodies Work?”
Dana Farber Cancer Institute: “What is a Checkpoint Inhibitor?”
Cancer Research Institute: “Cancer Immunotherapy, Melanoma.”
Perica, K. Rambam Maimonides Medical Journal, Jan. 6, 2015.
National Multiple Sclerosis Society: “What are T Cells?”
Cancer Research Institute: “Cancer Immunotherapy: The Next Decade?”
Seattle Cancer Care Alliance: “T-Cell Therapies”
National Cancer Institute: “Has the FDA Approved Any Cancer Treatment Vaccines?”
Science Daily: “Immunotherapy improves survival, quality of life in rapidly progressing head and neck cancer.”
© 2018 WebMD, LLC. All rights reserved.
Pagination
Next In Immunotherapy for Cancer
Types of Immunotherapy
Top Picks
Chemo: 3 Things You Need to Know
15 Cancer Symptoms Women Ignore
Chemo Side-Effect Tricks
Cancer: Should You See a Specialist?
8 Ways to Lower Your Cancer Risk
Preparing for Chemotherapy
Today on WebMD
Lung Cancer Symptoms
What you need to know.
Stem Cell Transplants
How they work for blood cancers.
Breast Cancer Quiz
Separate fact from fiction.
Cancer Side Effects
And how to best treat them.
Recommended for You
Blog
'I'll Be Bald Or Fat But Not Both'
HEALTH CHECK
What Is Your Cancer Risk?
SLIDESHOW
Breast Cancer: Symptoms, Treatment
SLIDESHOW
All About Prostate Cancer
SLIDESHOW
Complementary Treatment for Cancer
SLIDESHOW
A Visual Guide to Lung Cancer
SLIDESHOW
Ovarian Cancer Explained
Article
Treatments for Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia
Tools & ResourcesCommon Cancer TreatmentsAssess Your Cancer RiskBreast Cancer: A Visual OverviewDealing with Chemo NauseaLung Cancer: The Big PictureHow Friends Can Help Post-Diagnosis
Health Solutions
Help Your Child Grow
Dupuytren’s Treatment
Penis Curved When Erect
How Immunotherapy Fights Cancer
Is My Penis Normal?
Give the Gift of Life
Bent Fingers?
Why the HPV Vaccine is Important
Kid-Approved Smoothies
Caregivers: Don't Forget Your Needs
Addiction Treatment Centers
What Is Precision Cancer Medicine?
Specialized Gynecologic Oncologists
Missing Teeth?
Nutritious Smoothies
I Want to Quit Smoking
More from WebMD
Test Your Eye Health
Live Better With MS Assessment
What Is Endometriosis?
Acute Myeloid Leukemia
How Does Chemo Work?
Tips to Prevent Heartburn
Beat Crohn's Flares
What Meningitis Does to Your Body
Managing Diabetes at Work
Is It a Cold or Flu?
Avoid Allergy Triggers
Treating Advanced Prostate Cancer
Protect Yourself from a Bone Fracture
Test Your MS Care Routine
What's New in Psoriasis Research
Where Breast Cancer Spreads
Visit WebMD on Facebook
Visit WebMD on Twitter
Visit WebMD on Pinterest
PoliciesPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyEditorial PolicyAdvertising PolicyCorrection PolicyTerms of UseAboutContact UsAbout WebMDCareersNewsletterCorporateWebMD Health ServicesSite MapAccessibilityWebMD NetworkMedscapeMedscape ReferenceMedicineNeteMedicineHealthRxListOnHealthWebMDRxFirst AidWebMD MagazineWebMD Health RecordDictionaryPhysician DirectoryOur AppsWebMD MobileWebMD AppPregnancyBabyAllergyMedscapeFor AdvertisersAdvertise with UsAdvertising Policy
© 2005 - 2018 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved.WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.See additional information.