Skip to main content
Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with
limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off
compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site
without styles and JavaScript.
nature.comsubjectscancer immunotherapy
Menu
Search
My Account
Login
Atom
RSS Feed
Cancer immunotherapy
Definition
Cancer immunotherapy is a therapy used to treat cancer patients that involves or uses components of the immune system. Some cancer immunotherapies consist of antibodies that bind to, and inhibit the function of, proteins expressed by cancer cells. Other cancer immunotherapies include vaccines and T cell infusions.
Featured
News and Views
|
22 January 2019
The ‘obesity paradox’ in action with cancer immunotherapy
Joanne Lysaght
Nature Reviews Endocrinology, 1-2
Latest Research and Reviews
Research
|
25 January 2019
|
open
Memory T cells targeting oncogenic mutations detected in peripheral blood of epithelial cancer patients
Adoptive cell therapy (ACT) using neoantigen-specific T cells can lead to tumor regression. Here the authors use an in vitro stimulation approach to isolate tumor specific memory T cells from peripheral blood of metastatic epithelial cancer patients targeting unique as well as shared mutations in the KRAS oncogene.
Gal Cafri, Rami Yossef, Anna Pasetto, Drew C. Deniger, Yong-Chen Lu, Maria Parkhurst, Jared J. Gartner, Li Jia, Satyajit Ray, Lien T. Ngo, Mohammad Jafferji, Abraham Sachs, Todd Prickett, Paul F. Robbins & Steven A. Rosenberg
Nature Communications 10, 449
Reviews
|
24 January 2019
Interferons α and β in cancer: therapeutic opportunities from new insights
Interferons are key players in effective host immunological responses to malignant cells. This Review discusses new interferon-directed therapeutic opportunities — ranging from cyclic dinucleotides to genome methylation inhibitors, including combinations with other emerging therapeutic interventions — in cancer treatment.
Ernest C. Borden
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 1-16
Reviews
|
17 January 2019
Brain metastases
An estimated 20% of all patients with cancer will develop brain metastases, with the majority of brain metastases occurring in those with lung and breast cancer and melanoma. This Primer describes the mechanisms by which cancer cells migrate to the brain and the key advances necessary to improve the prognosis for patients with brain metastases.
Achal Singh Achrol, Robert C. Rennert, Carey Anders, Riccardo Soffietti, Manmeet S. Ahluwalia, Lakshmi Nayak, Solange Peters, Nils D. Arvold, Griffith R. Harsh, Patricia S. Steeg & Steven D. Chang
Nature Reviews Disease Primers 5, 5
Research
|
15 January 2019
|
open
Humanized anti-CD123 antibody facilitates NK cell antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) of Hodgkin lymphoma targets via ARF6/PLD-1
Daniel Ernst, Brent A. Williams, Xing-Hua Wang, Nara Yoon, Kyung-Phil Kim, Jodi Chiu, Zhi Juan Luo, Karin G. Hermans, Joerg Krueger & Armand Keating
Blood Cancer Journal 9, 6
Research
|
11 January 2019
|
open
CD73 expression on effector T cells sustained by TGF-β facilitates tumor resistance to anti-4-1BB/CD137 therapy
Targeting the immune-stimulatory receptor 4-1BB has only yielded modest benefit in cancer treatment. In this study, the authors show that CD73 expression on effector T cells sustained by TGF-β drives tumor resistance to anti-4-1BB therapy and therefore TGF- β blockade can be used to overcome such resistance.
Siqi Chen, Jie Fan, Minghui Zhang, Lei Qin, Donye Dominguez, Alan Long, Gaoxiang Wang, Renqiang Ma, Huabin Li, Yi Zhang, Deyu Fang, Jeffrey Sosman & Bin Zhang
Nature Communications 10, 150
Research
|
09 January 2019
De novo design of potent and selective mimics of IL-2 and IL-15
A hyper-stable de novo protein mimic of interleukin-2 computationally designed to not interact with a regulatory T-cell specific receptor subunit has improved therapeutic activity in mouse models of melanoma and colon cancer.
Daniel-Adriano Silva, Shawn Yu, Umut Y. Ulge, Jamie B. Spangler, Kevin M. Jude, Carlos Labão-Almeida, Lestat R. Ali, Alfredo Quijano-Rubio, Mikel Ruterbusch, Isabel Leung, Tamara Biary, Stephanie J. Crowley, Enrique Marcos, Carl D. Walkey, Brian D. Weitzner, Fátima Pardo-Avila, Javier Castellanos, Lauren Carter, Lance Stewart, Stanley R. Riddell, Marion Pepper, Gonçalo J. L. Bernardes, Michael Dougan, K. Christopher Garcia & David Baker
Nature 565, 186-191
All Research & Reviews
News and Comment
Research Highlights
|
22 January 2019
Organoid 2.0
Neal et al. have successfully established patient-derived organoids of tumour epithelia retaining native immune cells, thereby recapitulating tumour microenvironment diversity and enabling immuno-oncology studies.
Anna Dart
Nature Reviews Cancer, 1
News and Views
|
22 January 2019
The ‘obesity paradox’ in action with cancer immunotherapy
A recent study has shown that obesity and ageing induce T cell dysfunction and an upregulation of programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) on T cells across species, which is partially mediated by leptin. However, the polarization of T cells towards an exhaustive phenotype correlated with improved response rates to anti-PD-1 therapy in the setting of obesity.
Joanne Lysaght
Nature Reviews Endocrinology, 1-2
Comments and Opinion
|
15 January 2019
Truly personalized therapy — an end to the era of one size fits all
In 2018, several trials in breast cancer have shown efficacy of strategies that rely on novel markers, including gene expression assays or pathological complete response. The relevance of targeted strategies in patient subgroups and of immunotherapy efficacy were demonstrated.
Nadia Harbeck & Rachel Wuerstlein
Nature Reviews Clinical Oncology 16, 77-78
Comments and Opinion
|
10 January 2019
CAR T cell therapy: inroads to response and resistance
Several clinical studies in 2018 documented the potency of therapies based on T cells with chimeric antigen receptors (CAR T cells), but also revealed mechanisms of resistance. These insights may facilitate the design of improved CAR T cell therapies for B cell malignancies and beyond.
Christine E. Brown & Crystal L. Mackall
Nature Reviews Immunology, 1-2
Correspondence
|
10 January 2019
Successful treatment of two relapsed/refractory t(8;21) acute myeloid leukemia patients by CD19-directed chimeric antigen receptor T cells
Changju Qu, Zheng Li, Liqing Kang, Ying Wang, Haiping Dai, Jia Yin, Guanghua Chen, Mingqing Zhu, Li Yao, Ting Xu, Xiaopeng Tian, Yang Xu, Jia Chen, Xiaming Zhu, Lei Yu, Depei Wu & Xiaowen Tang
Bone Marrow Transplantation, 1-3
Research Highlights
|
07 January 2019
Expanding the search
Laumont, Vincent et al. have developed a proteogenomic strategy for high-throughput mass spectrometry-based discovery of aberrantly expressed tumour-specific antigens from non-coding sequences as well as mutated tumour-specific antigens encoded by all genomic regions, thereby expanding the number of targetable antigens that can be used for cancer vaccine development.
Anna Dart
Nature Reviews Cancer, 1
All News & Comment
Nature.com menu
Nature Research menu
Our Journals
Nature
Nature Communications
Nature Protocols
Scientific Reports
View all journals
Subjects
Biological Sciences
Scientific Community & Society
Earth & Environmental Sciences
Health Sciences
Physical Sciences
View all subjects
More
Contact us
Authors & Referees
Librarians
Advertisers
Press
About Nature Research
Search
Article search
Search
Advanced search
Quick links
Explore articles by subject
Find a job
Guide to authors
Editorial policies
Nature.com
ISSN
(online)
nature.com sitemap
About us
Press releases
Press office
Contact us
Discover content
Journals A-Z
Articles by subject
Nano
Protocol Exchange
Nature Index
Publish with us
Guide to Authors
Guide to Referees
Editorial policies
Open access
Reprints & permissions
Researcher services
Research data
Language editing
Scientific editing
Nature Masterclasses
Nature Research Academies
Libraries & institutions
Librarian service & tools
Librarian portal
Open research
Advertising & partnerships
Advertising
Partnerships & Services
Media kits
Branded content
Career development
Nature Careers
Nature
Conferences
Nature
events
Regional websites
Nature China
Nature India
Nature Japan
Nature Korea
Nature Middle East
© 2019 Springer Nature Publishing AG
Privacy Policy
Use of cookies
Manage cookies
Legal notice
Accessibility statement
Terms & Conditions