.announcement{background:#f6f6f6;}
.announcement .info{max-width:960px;padding:9px 15px 13px;text-align:center;}
Our website will soon be relaunched with a fresh look and improved user experience.
Take a look by visiting our test site.
For Referring Physicians
For Current Patients
Request an Appointment
We’re available 24/7 to discuss treatment options.
Call anytime
(888) 552-6760
Chat online now
Call us 24/7 at
(888) 552-6760
About Your Cancer
How We Treat Cancer
Our Difference
What to Expect
Our Treatment Results
Find Treatments
Become a Patient
Our Locations
See All Hospitals
Atlanta
Chicago
Philadelphia
Phoenix
Tulsa
Outpatient Care Centers
Downtown Chicago
North Phoenix
Scottsdale
See All Doctors
Community & Support
Donate to Cancer Research
What's New at CTCA
Patient Stories
The CTCA Blog
Questions & Answers
Healthy Recipes
Tips & Support
How we treat cancer
Our difference
Precision cancer treatment
TAPUR Study
Our team of experts
Integrative Care
Patient-centered care
Our accreditations
What to expect
Making the right treatment decision for you
Traveling to CTCA
What treating at CTCA is like
Our treatment results
Our Patient Experience Results
Find treatments
Becoming a patient
Getting a second opinion
Insurance
International patients
Clinical Trials
Immunotherapy
What is immunotherapy?
Immunotherapy is a broad category of cancer therapies that use the body’s immune system to fight cancer cells. These cells are different from normal cells, in that they do not die normally. Think of these rapidly-dividing cells like an out-of-control copy machine that won’t stop creating images. These abnormal cells frequently change, or “mutate,” to evade the immune system. Immunotherapy drugs are designed to alert the immune system about these mutated cells so it can locate and destroy them.
Immunotherapies fall into three general categories: checkpoint inhibitors, which disrupt signals that allow cancer cells to hide from an immune attack; cytokines, protein molecules that help regulate and direct the immune system; and cancer vaccines, which are used to both treat and prevent cancer by targeting the immune system.
How does immunotherapy spark the immune system to help fight cancer?
The immune system is always on patrol, like a police force charged with ridding the body of foreign invaders, such as viruses, bacteria or fungi. Lymph nodes, which make up most of the immune system, serve as police stations throughout the body. White blood cells, such as “T cells,” fight infection and cancer. They are the police officers. When a foreign invader is detected, the entire immune system is alerted through chemical signals, just as a police station would radio police officers to alert them about a problem.
Cancer cells are not recognized as invaders because they are the body’s own cells that have mutated, so that once-healthy cells no longer behave like normal cells. The immune system doesn’t recognize this distinction, allowing these dangerous cells to grow, divide and spread throughout the body. One way cancerous cells stay hidden is by sending signals to the PD-1 CTLA-4 receptors at certain checkpoints on immune cells. Those signals trick the body’s police force into thinking the cancer cells are normal. Immunotherapy drugs known as checkpoint inhibitors are designed to disrupt those signals, allowing the cancer cells to be exposed as invaders and triggering an immune system response. Cytokines and cancer vaccines are other types of immunotherapies used to generate an immune response by helping the body recognize cancer cells.
Experienced care team
With our team approach to care, our doctors and clinicians work together to come up with treatment options that meet your needs. Immunotherapy may be an option for you if you have certain forms of kidney or lung cancers, melanoma and some head and neck cancers. The treatment may work better for some cancers, so your doctor would monitor your progress closely and may pair immunotherapy with other treatments.
Personalized treatment approach
Patients and their caregivers are the ones who ultimately decide which treatment they want to pursue. Our clinicians are sensitive to your concerns and work to design treatment options that are appropriate for your needs and goals. We will provide you with the information you need to make an informed decision about immunotherapy.
Managing side effects
Immunotherapy can cause a variety of side effects, including fatigue, nausea, mouth sores, diarrhea, high blood pressure and fluid buildup, usually in the legs. Breast cancer patients, in particular, may experience fever, chills, pain, weakness, vomiting, headaches and rashes. The side effects of immunotherapy generally become less severe after the first treatment.
Throughout your treatment, your care team will provide integrative oncology services, including nutrition therapy, naturopathic medicine, pain management, oncology rehabilitation, mind-body medicine and spiritual support. These therapies can help reduce side effects and improve your overall quality of life during immunotherapy.
Immunotherapy
Checkpoint inhibitors
Cytokines
Vaccines
Back to all explore our advanced treatments
Search all treatments
Immunotherapy infographic
Immunotherapy is a broad category of cancer therapies that uses the body's immune system to recognize and attack cancer cells. Immunotherapy may be used in combination with other cancer treatments, such as chemotherapy, radiation and surgery.
Learn more about immunotherapy
Popular blogs on immunotherapy:
Why does immunotherapy work for some but not others?
Trial studies immunotherapy drug designed to trigger cascading immune response
FDA approves immunotherapy drugs to treat more cancer types
Immunotherapy takes cancer treatment into a new era
What's the Difference? B-cells and T-cells
Advances usher immunotherapy into new era
Carter's treatment shows power of immunotherapy
Donate to Cancer Research
Contact Us
(888) 552-6760 or Chat Online
Website Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Editorial Policy
Copyright
Guidelines
Sitemap
Nondiscrimination Notice and Language Assistance Services
© 2018 IPB
About Us
About Us
Our Approach
Press Room
Video Library
Contact Info
Español
Employment
Physician Careers
Search for a Career
Physician References
Hospitals
Atlanta
Chicago
Philadelphia
Phoenix
Tulsa
Outpatient Care Centers
Downtown Chicago
North Phoenix
Scottsdale
MyCTCA Patient Portal
Commonly Searched
What is cancer?
Cancer Treatments
Cancer Types
Treatments
Breast Cancer
Lung Cancer
Colorectal Cancer
Ovarian Cancer
Pancreatic Cancer
Prostate Cancer
Gynecologic Oncology
View More +
Brain Cancer
Bone Cancer
Liver Cancer
Leukemia
Oral Cancer
Cancer Drugs
See Our Doctors
Doctors in Atlanta
Doctors in Chicago
Doctors in Philadelphia
Doctors in Phoenix
Doctors in Tulsa
Donate to Cancer Research +
Cancer Compass +
Online Chat
Fill out all of the form below and we will connect you to someone to assist you.
First Name:
Don't forget to enter your first name.
Last Name:
Don't forget to enter your last name.
Email Address
Please enter a valid email address so we can respond to your inquiry.
Who are you seeking cancer care for?
Myself
My Spouse
A family member
A friend
None of the above
Please enter who you are seeking care for.
What type of insurance do you have?
Other
Please enter the type of insurance.
I have read and understand the disclaimer.
Please review the disclaimer.
Chat now
try { Typekit.load(); } catch (e) { }
var ctca = ctca || {};
ctca.browser = (function() {
function isMobile() { return false; }
function isTablet() { return false; }
return { isMobile: isMobile, isTablet: isTablet };
})();
setMobileOrder();
if (typeof window.downloadJSAtOnload === "undefined") {
window.downloadJSAtOnload = function (scriptSource) {
var element = document.createElement("script");
element.src = scriptSource;
document.body.appendChild(element);
}
}
var sfChatSource = "//api.cancercenter.com/ctcachat/chat.js?x=3";
if (window.addEventListener) {
window.addEventListener("load", downloadJSAtOnload(sfChatSource), false);
} else if (window.attachEvent) {
window.attachEvent("onload", downloadJSAtOnload(sfChatSource));
} else {
window.onload = downloadJSAtOnload(sfChatSource);
}
_satellite.pageBottom();