Skip to main content
Together we will beat cancer
Donate
SITE MENU
SEARCH
About Cancer
Cancer types
Cancer in general
Causes of cancer
Coping with cancer
Cancer statistics
More
Support Us
Donate
Events
Volunteer
Do your own fundraising
More
Our Research
By cancer type
By cancer subject
Near you
More...
Funding for Researchers
Our funding schemes
Applying for funding
Managing your research grant
How we deliver our research
More...
Shop
Find a shop
Shop online
Our eBay shop
About Us
What we do
Our organisation
Current jobs
Cancer news
Contact us
Search
Home > All sections
Top
General cancer information
General cancer informationTreatment for cancerImmunotherapy
What is immunotherapy?
Immunotherapy is a standard treatment for some types of cancer, for example melanoma that has spread. And it is in trials for other types of cancer.
What it isImmunotherapy uses our immune system to fight cancer. It works by helping the immune system recognise and attack cancer cells.
Some types of immunotherapy are also called targeted treatments or biological therapies.
You might have immunotherapy on its own or with other cancer treatments.
The immune systemOur immune system works to protect the body against infection, illness and disease. It can also protect us from the development of cancer.
The immune system includes the lymph glands, spleen and white blood cells. Normally, it can spot and destroy faulty cells in the body, stopping cancer developing. But a cancer might develop when:
the immune system recognises cancer cells but it is not strong enough to kill the cancer cellsthe cancer cells produce signals that stop the immune system from attacking itthe cancer cells hide or escape from the immune system
Find out more about the immune system
Types of immunotherapy
Cancer treatments do not always fit easily into a certain type of treatment. This is because some drugs or treatments work in more than one way and belong to more than one group. So you might hear the same drug or treatment called different things.
For example, a type of immunotherapy called checkpoint inhibitors are also described as a monoclonal antibody or targeted treatment.
Read more about targeted cancer drugs
There are different types of immunotherapy:
Monoclonal antibodies (MABs)
MABs recognise and attach to specific proteins on the surface of cancer cells.
Antibodies are found naturally in our blood and help us to fight infection. MAB therapies mimic natural antibodies, but are made in a laboratory. Monoclonal means all one type. So each MAB therapy is a lot of copies of one type of antibody.
MABs work as an immunotherapy in different ways. They might do one of the following:
trigger the immune systemhelp the immune system to attack cancer
MABs trigger the immune system by attaching themselves to proteins on cancer cells. This makes it easier for the cells of the immune system to find and attack the cancer cells. This process is called antibody dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC).
Checkpoint inhibitors are MABs that work by helping the immune system attack cancer cells. Cancer can sometimes push a stop button on the immune cells, so the immune system won’t attack them. Checkpoint inhibitors block cancers from pushing the stop button.
MABs that have an effect on the immune system
Vaccines to treat cancer
Researchers are looking at whether vaccines can be used as a treatment to help the immune system to recognise and attack cancer cells.
Normally, vaccines help to protect us from disease. They are made from weakened or harmless versions of the disease they are being made to protect us from. This means that they don’t cause the disease.
When you have the vaccine, it stimulates the immune system into action. The immune system makes antibodies that can recognise and attack the harmless versions of the disease. Once the body has made these antibodies it can recognise the disease if you come into contact with it again. So you’re protected from it.
Researchers are also testing vaccines to treat cancer. In the same way that vaccines work against diseases, the vaccines are made to recognise proteins that are on particular cancer cells. This helps the immune system to recognise and mount an attack against those particular cancer cells.
Read more about vaccines to treat cancer
Cytokines
Cytokines are a group of proteins in the body that play an important part in boosting the immune system.
Interferon and interleukin are types of cytokines found in the body. Scientists have developed man made versions of these to treat some types of cancer.
More about cytokines
Adoptive cell transfer
Adoptive cell transfer changes the genes in a person’s white blood cells (T cells) to help them recognise and kill cancer cells. Changing the T cell in this way is called genetically engineering the T cell.
This treatment is only available as part of a clinical trial in the UK. An example of a type of adoptive cell transfer is CAR T-cell therapy.
Read more about CAR T-cell therapy
Ask your cancer specialist about immunotherapy treatment. They can explain:
whether this treatment is suitable for youwhat the aim of treatment would bewhat it would involve and the side effects
Types of immunotherapyLast reviewed:&nbsp04 Nov 2017 Print page
References
Recognizing and managing on toxicities in cancer immunotherapy
LYang and others
Tumour Biology. 2017, Volume 39, Issue 3:1010428317694542
Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology (10th edition)
VT De Vita, TS Lawrence and SA Rosenberg
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2015
State of the art in anti-cancer mAbs
SM Chiavenna and others
Journal of Biomedical Science, 2017. Volume 24, Issue 15
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
Accessed September, 2017
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN)
Accessed September, 2017
Electronic Medicines Compendium
Accessed September, 2017
Related content
Related links
Cancer treatment
Types of immunotherapy
Targeted cancer drugs
Information and help
About Cancer generously supported by Dangoor Education since 2010.
Find a clinical trial
Search our clinical trials database for all cancer trials and studies recruiting in the UK
Cancer Chat forum
Talk to other people affected by cancer
Nurse helpline 0808 800 4040
Questions about cancer? Call freephone or email us
Cancer research information
Find
local shops
Shop
online
Contact
us
Jobs
Follow us
Speak
to a nurse
0808 800 4040
About our information
Terms & Conditions
Privacy
Modern Slavery Statement
Cookies
Accessibility
Sitemap
Cancer Research UK is a registered charity in England and Wales (1089464),
Scotland (SC041666) and the Isle
of Man (1103). A company limited by guarantee. Registered company in England
and Wales (4325234) and the
Isle of Man (5713F). Registered address: Angel Building, 407 St John Street,
London EC1V 4AD.