Skip to content
About
Our Members
Publications
Why Now
Our Model
Our Work
Research Focuses
Research Projects
Our Partners
Programs
For Patients
What’s New
Search
Close
Search
Why Now
Our Model
Our Work
Research Focuses
Research Projects
Our Partners
Programs
For Patients
What’s New
About
Our Members
Publications
Why Cancer ImmunotherapyA breathtaking new hope that can help end cancer for good.
Why Cancer Immunotherapy?
What is it?
Why is it Different?
Approach
There is a smarter way to treat cancer.
The economic cost of cancer reached $1.2 trillion in 2010, according to the World Health Organization. Despite the investment in treatment and prevention, 8.8 million people died of cancer in 2015. That number is projected to increase to 14.6 million in 2035.
15m
Projected number of people who will die of cancer in 2035 (WHO)
2 in 5
People will get cancer in their lifetime (ACS)
$1.2t
Economic cost of cancer globally (WHO)
What is it?
Cancer immunotherapy is a radical new treatment with the potential to generate long-lasting regressions for all types and stages of cancer.
Immunotherapy harnesses the body’s own powerful immune system and mobilizes its highly refined disease-fighting arsenal to eliminate cancer cells.
The immune system produces specialized disease-fighting cells that circulate throughout the body, continually seeking out and destroying “foreign” agents. Cancer cells elude detection from the immune system because of their similarities to healthy tissues. Cancer immunotherapies override cancer’s evasive strategies to ensure that a powerful, precise and adaptable immune attack is focused on tumors anywhere in the body.
Why is it Different?
Immunotherapy has many advantages over previous types of cancer treatments.
Durable
Immune cells “remember” cancer cells to keep them from coming back
Adaptable
As tumors evolve, the immune system adapts in tandem
Targeted
Immunotherapy can kill cancer cells without harming healthy tissue
Systemic
The immune system can target and attack tumors anywhere in the body
Synergistic
Immunotherapy can complement and build on the efficacy of other cancer therapies
Universal
Immunotherapy has the potential to be effective for virtually all forms of cancer
The key difference that separates immunotherapy is its durability. While traditional therapies may extend lives, the responses are often not durable – which means that the disease can progress or recur, often very quickly. Immunotherapies, on the other hand, can be curative and durable. Patients with sufficient anti-cancer immunity can achieve long-lasting control over their disease.
History of Cancer Treatments
Approach
Unlocking the promise of immunotherapy will be complex.
Currently there are more than a thousand clinical trials exploring immunotherapy for cancer treatment, with hundreds of research centers and companies vying for answers. To dramatically accelerate cancer research breakthroughs and hasten the delivery of better treatments to patients, the Parker Institute is leading a smart, coordinated approach with the finest academic and industry partners.
40+
Types of Cancer
40+
Laboratory Technologies
20+
Research Disciplines
250+
Companies
100+
Research Centers
1000+
Clinical Trials
About Our Model
FAQ
Careers
For Patients
For Media
Contact Us
Get Email Updates
© 2019 All Rights Reserved
Terms & Conditions
Privacy
Cookies
Member Center Login
Get Email Updates
First Name
Last Name
Email Address
Role
Pharma/Biotech
Nonprofit
Academia
Policy/Government
Patient or Caretaker
Other
I understand that the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy will use the information I provide on this form to provide me with email updates relating to the activities and mission of the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy from time to time.
The Parker Institute will treat your information with respect. For more information about our privacy practices please view our Privacy Policy. We use a company called MailChimp to run our email update service. Please view their Privacy Policy and Terms as well.
Submit
This website uses cookies and similar automated technologies to store information on your computer or mobile device. By continuing to use this website, you agree to the temporary placement of these cookies and similar automated technologies. Read our updated Privacy Policy and Cookie Policy to learn more.I Agree