We use cookies to give you the best online experience. By using our website you agree to our use of cookies in accordance with our cookie policy. Learn more
OK
Roche
Menu
Search
Global Web Site
:
Research & Development
You are here:
Research & Development
What we are working on
Oncology
Cancer immunotherapy
Roche
Home
About Roche
Products
Sustainability
Research & Development
Partnering
Media
Investors
Careers
Drawn to science
Science and the city
Call for Grant Notifications for IME
What we are working on
Who we are and how we work
Oncology
Neuroscience
Infectious diseases
Immunology
Ophthalmology
Haematology
Haemophilia
Respiratory
Research technologies
Cardiovascular and metabolism
Women’s health
Cancer immunotherapy
For more than 50 years, Roche has been developing medicines with the goal to redefine treatment in oncology. Today, we’re investing more than ever to bring personalised immunotherapy to people with cancer.
Introducing cancer immunotherapy
In recent years progress has been made in developing cancer immunotherapies that target specific aspects of an individual’s tumour.
more
Immunotherapy at Roche
Roche are leading in cancer immunotherapy through innovative research, including immune profiling, with the goal to develop treatment tailored to individuals.
more
The cancer immunity cycle
A new framework is redefining how we implement personalised cancer immunotherapy research around the world.
more
Beyond the immunity cycle
Roche’s scientists are leading pioneers in immune biology and cancer research, which is resulting in innovative and personalised treatment options in cancer.
Collaboration in research
Cancer remains one of the leading causes of death worldwide, but world-class research provides hope.
more
Biomarkers in cancer
Biomarkers continue to play a critical role in the development of personalised healthcare, particularly in cancer.
more
Potential pathways
Learn about some of the different ways we can harness the power of our immune system to fight cancer.
more
Linking T-cells and cancer cells
When the body’s own immune system fails, T-cell bispecific antibodies help T-cells spring back into action and attack cancer cells.
CEO on cancer immunotherapy
Roche CEO Severin Schwan talks about our commitment and leadership in this exciting field.
Rewriting the book on immunotherapy
Learn how biomarkers take the stage in helping doctors diagnose cancer.
more
The PD-L1 pathway
The role of the immune system is to protect the body from foreign invaders. PD-L1 can help tumour cells evade the immune surveillance.
Unleashing the T-Cell army
Learn how our research and development team managed to separate 200 known cancer types into three primary immune profiles.
Tags:
Science
Share
Share via email
Share on Facebook
Share on Twitter
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Share on Xing
Close
© 2019 F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd
27.01.2019
Legal Statement
Privacy Policy
This website contains information on products which is targeted to a wide range of audiences and could contain product details or information otherwise not accessible or valid in your country. Please be aware that we do not take any responsibility for accessing such information which may not comply with any legal process, regulation, registration or usage in the country of your origin.
Twitter
LinkedIn
Facebook
YouTube