Your Body
Your Hope
Your immune system may be the key to beating cancer.
Jimmy Smits, SU2C Ambassador
Photo by Timothy White
Stand Up To Cancer has had a major role in galvanizing immunotherapy approaches. The big opportunity is to take immunotherapy
from the early stage ideas and get it out to where the public can benefit.
Carl H. June, MD
Leader SU2C-Lustgarten Foundation CAR T Cell Translational Research Team
What is immunotherapy?
What cancers can immunotherapy be used for?
Why are immunotherapy clinical trials important?
How do I know if immunotherapy is right for me?
What is immunotherapy?
Immunotherapy, an exciting approach to cancer treatment, works by empowering your body’s own immune system to correctly
identify and eradicate cancer cells. This approach has been used to effectively fight many types of cancer, with
new research leading to greater hope each day.
What cancers can immunotherapy be used for?
Immunotherapy enables the immune system to recognize and target cancer cells, making it a universal form of treatment.
Currently, immunotherapy can be used to treat forms of these cancers:
Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia
Bladder Cancer
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
Folicular Lymphoma
Hairy Cell Leukemia
Head and Neck Cancer
Hodgkin Lymphoma
Kidney (Renal) Cancer
Lung Cancer
Mantle Cell Lymphoma
Melanoma
Multiple Myeloma
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma
Many researchers believe it has the power to be the cure for all cancer types, including:
Brain Cancer
Breast Cancer
Cervical
Colorectal
Esophageal
Liver
Ovarian
Pancreatic
Prostate
Sarcoma
Stomach
Why are immunotherapy clinical trials important?
Currently, only six active immunotherapies have been approved for cancer, meaning hundreds of other new and promising
cancer immunotherapy treatments are only available to patients in clinical trials. Participation in these types
of clinical trials may be the most promising treatment option for patients facing cancer today and is critical
to the development and approval of these treatments in the future.
How do I know if immunotherapy is right for me?
Don’t hesitate to ask questions. Talk to your doctor, research nurse and the rest of your medical care team about
clinical trials they might recommend or ones you’ve found online. They are often your best resource for helping
you navigate available treatment options.
In general, the questions you will want to ask are similar to those you would ask your doctor about any type of
treatment. Knowing both your treatment and clinical trial options will help you make the most informed decision.
If your doctor recommends a trial, you will want to learn more about what treatment the trial involves, possible
side effects from the treatment, financial responsibility, if travel is involved and how long the treatment will
last.
QUESTIONS TO ASK YOUR DOCTOR [PDF Download]
Find A Trial
Take The Next Step
The latest cancer treatment advances, like immunotherapy, have been made possible because of patients who have
participated in clinical trials.
Speak To An Expert
SU2C is pleased to connect interested parties with EmergingMed, a free and confidential trial
matching service that will help guide you through a search and referral process to find a clinical trial that
may be right for you.
Call Toll-Free
(877.769.4829)
Monday – Friday 9:00 am – 6:00 pm ET
Se Habla Espanol
OR
Fill Out The Form Below
A Clinical Trial Navigator will be in touch with you within one business day to answer your questions about clinical trials
and help guide you through the search process.
Submit to begin your search
Thank you!
Thank you for submitting your contact information. A Clinical Trial Navigator will contact you within
one business day.
The form has NOT been submitted due to invalid entry(ies) - please correct the issue(s) highlighted below.
First Name
*
Last Name
Email Address
*
Confirm Email Address
*
Phone Number
Notes
(
1024)
By submitting this form, you accept EmergingMed's
Terms & Conditions and grant permission for EmergingMed to contact you. EmergingMed will not
sell or share your information (
Privacy Policy). Please do not submit another person’s name or email without his or her consent.
SUBMIT
EmergingMed is a third-party service provider and is not affiliated with SU2C in any way. SU2C disclaims any and
all liability, including any express or implied warranties, whether oral or written, for such third-party services.
By using such services, you acknowledge that no representation has been made by SU2C as to the fitness of the third-party
services for your intended purpose.
Learn about the SU2C Scientific Research Teams hard at work on immunotherapy treatments.
SU2C is proud to be among the organizations at the forefront of immunotherapy research and clinical trials, through
SU2C Dream Teams and SU2C Research Grants.
To learn more about SU2C Catalyst® teams that are focusing on immunotherapy visit
SU2C.org/Catalyst.
Below are the SU2C research teams focusing on immunotherapy:
Immunology
Pediatric Cancer
Convergence Approach to Pancreatic Cancer
Colorectal Cancer Treatment
Lung Cancer
Reprogramming Pancreatic Cancer
Ovarian Cancer
Convergence Breast Cancer
CAR T-Cell Pancreatic Research
HPV Research
Convergence Cancer Evolution
Convergence Pancreatic Cancer
Additional Resources on Immunotherapy
Stand Up To Cancer (SU2C) is a division of the Entertainment Industry Foundation (EIF), a 501(c)(3) tax-exempt organization.
SU2C raises funds to accelerate the pace of research that will get new therapies to patients quickly and save lives
now. In this new campaign and public service announcement (PSA), supported by a charitable donation from Bristol-Myers
Squibb, SU2C is helping to increase the awareness around immunotherapy.
The content appearing on this website is provided for informational purposes only. NOTHING CONTAINED ON THIS WEBSITE
IS INTENDED TO BE FOR MEDICAL DIAGNOSIS OR TREATMENT OF ANY ILLNESS, CONDITION OR DISEASE. INFORMATION ON THIS WEBSITE
SHOULD NOT BE RELIED UPON FOR PERSONAL OR MEDICAL DECISIONS OF ANY KIND. ALWAYS SEEK THE ADVICE OF YOUR PHYSICIAN OR
OTHER QUALIFIED HEALTHCARE PROVIDER REGARDING ANY HEALTHCARE QUESTIONS.
PSA photos provided by: ©2017, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, ajijchan / Thinkstock, Alex Ritter, Jennifer Lippincott
Schwartz and Gillian Griffiths, National Institutes of Health, Chad Baker / Thinkstock, Chris Harvey / Thinkstock,
danez / Thinkstock, ifc2 / Thinkstock, iStock.com / Azemdega, iStock.com / bst2012, iStock.com / filadendron, iStock.com
/ Gerville, iStock.com / Inok, iStock.com / miljko, iStock.com / monkeybusinessimages, iStock.com / PeopleImages, iStock.com
/ Rawpixel Ltd, iStock.com / RonTech2000, iStock.com / vshivkova, iStock.com / wundervisuals, iStock.com / Yagi-Studio,
Julio C. Valencia, NCI Center for Cancer Research, McBain Laboratory, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes
of Health