Close
Congratulations to the 2018 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Winners Read More
Menu
Immunotherapy
What is Immunotherapy?
Immunotherapy by Cancer Type
Immunotherapy Treatment Types
Timeline of Progress
Immunotherapy Stories
Why Immunotherapy
Immune to Cancer Blog
Join the Cause
Donate
Fundraise
Fundraising Events
Other Ways to Give
Corporate Partnerships
Cancer Immunotherapy Month
Patients
Your ImmunoCommunity
Clinical Trials
Patient Summit Series
Webinars
ImmunoGlossary
Additional Resources
Scientists
Fellowships & Grants
Clinical Accelerator
Cancer Immunotherapy Consortium
CRI Funding Directory
Meetings and Resources
About CRI
History
Accountability
Hall of Cancer Heroes
Scientific Leadership
Board of Trustees
Associate Board
Staff
Stay Informed
Donate
Monthly
One-Time
Immunotherapy Promise
Donate by Mail
Fundraisers
Other Ways to Give
Login
Discover the promise of
Immunotherapy
Let's spread the word about Immunotherapy! Click to share this page with your community.
Copy Link
What Is Immunotherapy
Why It Matters
How It Works
CRI's Impact
Revolutionary Cancer Treatments with Profound Potential
Immunotherapy has the power to become a cure for all cancers—already working to successfully treat some previously incurable cancers.
IMMUNOTHERAPY BY CANCER TYPE
Bladder Cancer
Brain Cancer
Breast Cancer
Cervical Cancer
Childhood Cancer
Colorectal Cancer
Esophageal Cancer
Head and Neck Cancer
Kidney Cancer
Leukemia
Liver Cancer
Lung Cancer
Lymphoma
Melanoma
Multiple Myeloma
Ovarian Cancer
Pancreatic Cancer
Prostate Cancer
Sarcoma
Skin Cancer
Stomach Cancer
Immunotherapy Matters, For One and All
Immunotherapy promises to change the lives of all people affected by cancer.
Get to know the unique benefits of cancer immunotherapy below.
What is cancer immunotherapy?
Cancer immunotherapy—treatments that harness and enhance the innate powers of the immune system to fight cancer—represents the most promising new cancer treatment approach since the development of the first chemotherapies in the 1940s.
For more than 60 years, the Cancer Research Institute (CRI) has been the pioneer in advancing this new class of treatment.
Learn About CRI's Impact
What types of cancers can immunotherapy treat?
Immunotherapy has potential to treat all cancers
Immunotherapy enables the immune system to recognize, target, and eliminate cancer cells, wherever they are in the body, making it a universal answer to cancer.
Immunotherapy is an effective treatment for patients with certain types of cancer that have been resistant to chemotherapy and radiation treatment, and has also been approved as a first line of treatment in several cancers. It may be given alone or in combination with other cancer treatments.
Read More
Does immunotherapy have any side effects?
Immunotherapy may not cause the same side effects as chemotherapy and radiation and may vary depending on which type is used
Cancer immunotherapy is focused on the immune system and is often more targeted than chemotherapy or radiation
Both chemotherapy and radiation damage healthy cells, commonly leading to hair loss and nausea/vomiting, side effects that may be less likely with immunotherapy
They are usually related to stimulation of the immune system and can range from minor symptoms of inflammation to major conditions similar to autoimmune disorders
How long does immunotherapy last?
Cancer immunotherapy offers the possibility for long-term control of cancer
Immunotherapy can “train” the immune system to remember cancer cells. This “immunomemory” may result in longer-lasting and potentially permanent protection against cancer recurrence.
Clinical studies on long-term overall survival have shown that the beneficial responses to cancer immunotherapy treatment are durable—that is, they can be maintained even after treatment is completed.
Boosting the Body's Powerful Immune System
Immunotherapy treatment harnesses the body's natural strength to fight cancer—empowering the immune system to conquer more types of cancer and save more lives.
Antibodies
proteins that bind to antigens on harmful invaders in the body (e.g., germs and viruses). Also mark cells for attack and destruction by other immune cells
B Cells
release antibodies to defend against harmful invaders in the body. Each is programmed to make one specific antibody (e.g., common cold virus)
CD8+ Killer T Cells
destroys thousands of virus-infected cells each day. CD8+ killer T cells even seek out and destroy cancer cells
Cytokines
messenger molecules that help immune cells communicate with each other to coordinate the right immune response
Dendritic Cells
digest foreign and cancerous cells and present their proteins to immune cells that destroy them
CD4+ Helper T Cells
send "help" signals to the other immune cells (i.e., CD8+ killer T cells) to make them more efficient at destroying harmful invaders. Also maintain lines of communication with B cells
Regulatory T Cells
provide the checks and balances to ensure that the immune system does not overreact
Macrophages
known as the "big eaters" of the immune system for their ability to engulf and destroy bacteria and other harmful. They also present antigens to other cells of the immune system
See How Your Immune System Works
Immunotherapy Matters, For One and All
As a science-first organization dedicated to supporting cancer immunotherapy research, we're funding a future that fights back against cancer—all with your help.
88 Centsof every dollar spent goes to programs
All Cancerscan potentially be treated with immunotherapy
$25 Millionawarded in 2018
Over 120 clinical trials funded
Support our mission to cure ALL cancers, for good.Make a Donation
Join Team CRI by supporting our many dedicated fundraisers.Support the Cause
Find an immunotherapy clinical trial
Search Online
Phone
Email
Register Now
Create a profile and fill out a questionnaire to identify immunotherapy clinical trials for which you may be eligible.
(855) 216-0127
CALLING HOURS  |  M-F 8:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. ET
Se habla espanol
Email
Request a call from a Clinical Trial Navigator
LEARN MORE ABOUT CLINICAL TRIALS
News & Events
Cancer Immunotherapy: The Year in Review and a Look at the Year Ahead
Read More
Learning from a Courageous Dog with Cancer
Read More
World Cancer Day 2019
View Event
04
Feb
2019 Immuno-Oncology 360˚
View Event
06
Feb
Growth in Global Clinical Trial Landscape for PD-1/L1 Checkpoint Inhibitors
Read More
All Blog Posts
All Events
All News
*Immunotherapy results may vary from patient to patient.
Contact Us
Cancer Research Institute | National Headquarters
29 Broadway, Floor 4 | New York, NY 10006-3111
(800) 992-2623(212) 832-9376Staff Directory
Stay Connected with CRI
Follow us
Recent Blog Posts
Dr. Elizabeth Jaffee highlights 2018’s advances and 2019’s potential breakthroughs in cancer treatment
Francesca Pearson organized a Facebook fundraiser in memory of her dog Bosch.
Save more lives by fueling the discovery and development of powerful immunotherapies for All Types of Cancer
Immunotherapy
CRI's Global Impact
CRI's Global Impact
What Is Immunotherapy?
Why Use Immunotherapy?
Treatment Types
Cancer Type Options
Timeline of Progress
Stories
Programs
Fellowships & Grants
Clinical Accelerator
Cancer Immunotherapy Consortium
Patient Summit Series
ImmunoCommunity
Resources
Clinical Trial Finder
Webinars
ImmunoGlossary
Cancer Immunology Research Journal
CRI iAtlas
Stay Informed
Event Calendar
Blog
News
Annual Reports
Subscribe
Contact Us
Cancer Research Institute is a 501(c)(3) charitable organization.
Copyright © 2019 Cancer Research Institute | Privacy Policy
Top