Your browser does not have JavaScript enabled and some parts of this website will not work without it.
For the best experience on the Abcam website please upgrade to a modern browser such as Google Chrome
We use cookies to make our site as useful as possible.
Our Cookie Policy explains how you can opt-out of the cookies we use.
If you continue without changing your cookie settings, we'll assume you’re happy with this.
Continue
Continue
United States
Location selector
Your location is currently set to:
If incorrect, please enter your location into the box below, to view site information related to your location.
Select Location
Albania
Algeria
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Aruba
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bermuda
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cayman Islands
Chile
China
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cote d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Estonia
Ethiopia
Faroe Islands
Finland
France
French Guiana
Gabon
Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guadeloupe
Guam
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Rep of
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lebanon
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macau
Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Malta
Martinique
Mexico
Monaco
Morocco
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands Ant
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Reunion
Romania
Russian Fed
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Tanzania, United Republic of
Thailand
Togo
Trinidad & Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
U.A.E.
Uganda
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Vietnam
Zambia
Call (888) 77-ABCAM (22226) or contact us
Need help? Contact us
My account
Sign out
Sign in
or
Register with us
Welcome
Sign in
or
Don't have an account?
Register with us
My basket
Quick order
Abcam homepage
Research Products
By product type
Primary antibodies
Secondary antibodies
ELISA and Matched Antibody Pair Kits
Cell and tissue imaging tools
Cellular and biochemical assays
By product type
Proteins and Peptides
Proteomics tools
Agonists, activators, antagonists and inhibitors
Lysates
Multiplex Assays
By research area
Cancer
Cardiovascular
Cell Biology
Epigenetics
Metabolism
Developmental Biology
By research area
Immunology
Microbiology
Neuroscience
Signal Transduction
Stem Cells
Diagnostic & Therapeutic Solutions
Custom solutions & partnerships
Custom antibody development and commercial partnerships to advance your diagnostic and therapeutic discovery.
Create custom solutions with us
Partner with us
Support
Protocols & troubleshooting
Technical FAQs
Get technical help
RabMAb Advantages
Buying FAQs
Antibody Guide
Scientific webinars
Biochemical product FAQ
Support resources
eProcurement
Check out our protocols
Visit protocols and troubleshooting or check them out using the Abcam app for iPhone
Protocols and troubleshooting
iPhone app
Events
Conference calendar
Cancer
Cardiovascular
Epigenetics & Nuclear signaling
Immunology
Neuroscience
Stem cells
Tradeshows
Scientific webinars
Keep up to date with the latest events
Full event breakdown with abstracts, speakers, registration and more
View global event calendar
Pathways
Cell signalling pathways
View all pathways
View all interactive pathways
An introduction to cancer immunotherapy
Related
PD-L1/ PD-1 pathway
PD-L1 [28-8] RabMAb® antibody
PD1 monoclonal antibody
Specific PD-L2 detection
Conjugated PD-L1 antibodies
Immune identification
Get effector T cell poster
Identify CD8+ T cells
CD4 antibody
Identify FOXP3+ T cells
Protocols
Flow cytometry phenotyping
Cell staining protocol
Cytokine quantification
Learn how cancer immunotherapies like immune checkpoint modulators and combination immunotherapy are unlocking the power of the immune response against cancer.
Cancer immunotherapy approaches
Immunotherapy has shown significant potential as a more targeted approach to treating cancer by harnessing the body's immune system to fight tumor cells. There are various cancer immunotherapy approaches to boost the response of the immune system to cancer cells:Immune checkpoint modulators – use monoclonal antibodies against specific receptors that modulate immune response. Cancer cells over-express these receptors to escape detection and destruction by the immune system.Combination immunotherapy – combination of traditional therapies or combination of monoclonal antibody inhibitors with other checkpoint inhibitors or pathways, like CTLA-4 blockage plus PD-1/PD-L1 blockage for a synergistic effect.Adoptive T-cell therapy – consists of tuning the patient’s tumor-specific T cells to help boost the ability of their immune system to overwhelm the tumor.Vaccines – involves administration of neoantigens or other antigens that can be targeted by the T cells (eg targets for T cell recognition) to stimulate the patient’s immune responses against the tumor cells.Find products to help you unlock the power of immunotherapyImmune checkpoint modulatorsThe human immune system protects against foreign pathogens and diseases, but it also plays a very important role in clearing the body’s own unhealthy and ailing cells. As such, the immune system is also capable of recognizing and eliminating cancer cells.The T cells of the immune system have a capacity to selectively recognize and kill pathogens or unhealthy cells by orchestrating a coordinated immune response including innate and adaptive responses.Many checkpoints ensure the cells of the immune system do not mistakenly destroy healthy cells during an immune response (autoimmune reaction). Cancer cells have adapted to exploit these immune checkpoints as way to evade immune detection and elimination.By blocking checkpoint inhibitors including PD-1, PD-L1 and CTLA-4 with monoclonal antibodies, the immune system can overcome the cancer’s ability to resist the immune responses and stimulate the body's own mechanisms to remain effective in its defenses against cancer.
Figure 1. T cells can be inhibited by receptors expressed by tumor cells. Using monoclonal antibodies against immune checkpoint receptors induces T cell anti-tumor activity.Read more about the PD-1/ PD-L1 pathwayCombination immunotherapyThe efficiency of the immune checkpoint blockade with monoclonal antibodies in cancer treatment is remarkable and has durable effects; however, it is limited to a subset of patients. To enhance and broaden the anti-tumor activity of immune checkpoint inhibition the next step is combining agents with synergistic mechanisms of action. Examples are the success of the combination of PD-1/PD-L1 inhibition blockage with complementary checkpoint inhibitor CTLA-4 1.Another example is IDO (indoleamine-pyrrole 2,3-dioxygenase), this enzyme is constitutively expressed in the tumor microenvironment either by tumor cells or host immune cells and is stimulated by inflammatory cytokines as IFN-γ, leading to host immune inhibition through increased Treg and effector T cell proliferation blockage. Combination of IDO inhibition and immune checkpoint blockage are currently under clinical investigation, with promising initial results1.Novel treatments like agonistic co-stimulatory antibodies costimulatory molecules such as CD137 (4-1BB), CD134 (OX40), glucocorticoid-induced TNFR (GITR; CD357), and CD40 are expressed by activated T cells, activated natural killer (NK) cells, natural killer T (NKT) cells, Tregs, and other immune cells are emerging new therapeutics1.See effector T cell posterAdoptive T cell therapyAdoptive T cell therapy involves isolation of tumor-specific T cells from patients and their expansion ex vivo. This method enables greater a number of tumor-specific T cells to be generated than vaccination alone. The tumor-specific T cells are then infused into patients in an attempt to give their immune system the ability to overwhelm remaining tumor cells.  There are many forms of adoptive T cell therapy used for cancer treatment:Culturing tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)Isolating and expanding a type of T cell or cloneUsing T cells engineered to recognize and attack tumorsT cells are engineered to express chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) that recognize cancer-specific antigens. Researchers can prime the cells to recognize and kill tumor cells that would otherwise escape immune detection2  The process of generating CAR-T cells involves extracting a patient’s T cells, transfecting them with a gene for a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR), then reinfusing the transfected cells into the patient. The infusion of T cells is generally well tolerated. Any adverse events from T-cell infusion are infrequent and mild3 .CAR-T cells and T cells with engineered tumor-specific TCRs show anti-tumor activity in some solid tumors and hematological malignances1.VaccinesThere have been recent advances in the development of peptide vaccines for cancer therapy. Malignant cells express antigens that can be harnessed to elicit anti-cancer immune responses. These antigens are able to stimulate the patient’s specific T-cell responses against the tumor cells. This strategy can be particularly important and efficient for low mutational burden tumors, where anti-PD1 monotherapy efficiency is limited by low levels of T cell clones primed for tumor antigens1.Cancer vaccines consists of administration of tumor-associated antigens – for example melanoma-associated antigen-A3 (MAGE-A3) – in the form of either peptides or recombinant proteins in the presence of adequate adjuvants. The antigen-presenting cells interact with the tumor-associated antigens to initiate T-cell driven immune response against cancer cells that expresses the antigen.Targeting biologically relevant antigens via vaccination in animal models has resulted in both tumor inhibition and modulation of the biology of the tumor to make cancer more amenable to standard treatments 1.Anti-cancer vaccines are often employed as therapeutic (rather than prophylactic) agents. Current efforts are focused on identifying relevant tumor rejection antigens, ie tumor-associated antigens that can elicit an immune response leading to disease eradication.Read next PD-1/PDL-1 pathway overview​References1. Ott, P. et al. (2017). Combination immunotherapy: a road map. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer (2017) 5:162. Grupp, S., Kalos, M., Barrett, D., Aplenc, R., Porter, D., Rheingold, S., Teachey, D., Chew, A., Hauck, B., Wright, J., Milone, M., Levine, B. and June, C. (2013). Chimeric Antigen Receptor-Modified T Cells for Acute Lymphoid Leukemia. New England Journal of Medicine, 368(16), pp.1509-1518.3. Tey, S. (2014). Adoptive T-cell therapy: adverse events and safety switches. Clin Trans Immunol, 3(6), p.e17.
Get resources and offers direct to your inbox
Sign up
A-Z by research area
Cancer
Cardiovascular
Cell biology
Developmental biology
Epigenetics & Nuclear signaling
Immunology
Metabolism
Microbiology
Neuroscience
Signal transduction
Stem cells
A-Z by product type
Primary antibodies
Secondary antibodies
Biochemicals
Isotype controls
Flow cytometry multi-color selector
Kits
Loading controls
Lysates
Peptides
Proteins
Slides
Tags and cell markers
Tools & Reagents
Help & support
Support
Make an Inquiry
Protocols & advice
Buying FAQs
RabMAb products
Biochemical product FAQs
Company
Investor relations
Company news
Careers
About us
Blog
Events
Tradeshows
Conferences
International websites
abcam.cn
abcam.co.jp
Join with us
LinkedIn
facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Terms
Privacy policy
Legal
Modern slavery statement
© 1998-2019 Abcam plc. All rights reserved.