Gryphon LoginMyCoursesAlumniUCLA HealthContact Us
The Immunology, Inflammation, Infection, and Transplantation Research Theme (I3T)
Toggle navigation
About
I3T Scientific Retreat
Immunology Postings
Overview
Leadership
Seminar Series
Spotlights
Immunology Postings
NIH-NIAID Consortium
Leadership
Seed Grant Awardees
Seminar Series
Spotlights
Immunology Research
Cancer Immunotherapy
Gene Therapy
Human Immune System Generation
Mechanobiology: Manipulating Cells and Tissues
Inflammation Research
Enhancing Immune Responses
Immunometabolism
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Transcriptional Cascades
Infection Research
Cryo-Electron Microscopy
International Public Health
Novel Anti-Infectives
Understanding Bacteria
Transplantation Research
Limb Transplantation
Organ Rejuvenation
Chronic Transplant Rejection
Transplant Education
Annual I3T Scientific Retreat
I3T Scientific Retreat 2018 - Program
I3T Scientific Retreat 2018
UCLA Research Overview
Support Science
Gryphon Login
MyCourses
Alumni
UCLA Health
Contact Us
The Immunology, Inflammation, Infection, and Transplantation Research Theme (I3T)
Cancer Immunotherapy
Home
Immunology
Immunology Research
Cancer Immunotherapy
How can we get the immune system to cure cancer?
Share this
Antoni Ribas, MD, PhDDirector, Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy Center at UCLA
Groundbreaking Interventions
Dr. Antoni Ribas develops groundbreaking immunotherapies, interventions that mobilize the immune system to fight cancer. By studying the cellular mechanisms driving—or inhibiting—an immune response to cancer, Dr. Ribas uncovers techniques to activate our natural defenses.
Dr. Ribas’s discoveries have helped many patients fight cancer when nothing else worked.
Giving T Cells a "Green Light" to Fight Cancer
To allow T cells to fight cancer, Dr. Ribas tried blocking the programmed death-1 (PD-1) protein, a receptor cancer manipulates to evade immune response.
He found that pembrolizimab—a drug developed by Merck to block PD-1—helped many patients fight their cancer. Read more in PD-1 Blockade Induces Responses by Inhibiting Adaptive Immune Resistance, published in Nature.
However, PD-1 blockade did not help all patients, and Dr. Ribas wanted to know why.
Pembrolizimab worked best when T cells had flocked to the tumor site, giving PD-1 blockade plenty of “fighters” to release. Read more in High Response Rate to PD-1 Blockade in Desmoplastic Melanomas, published in Nature.
Pembrolizimab failed when T cells ignored the tumor site, leaving PD-1 blockade with no “fighters” to release. Read more in Mutations Associated with Acquired Resistance to PD-1 Blockade in Melanoma, published in the New England Journal of Medicine.
Bolstering Cancer Immunotherapies with Oncolytic Viruses
Dr. Ribas combined pembrolizimab with an oncolytic virus, injected at the tumor site. He believed the virus—a foreign invader—would lure T cells toward cancer tumors and boost the efficacy of PD-1 blockade.
The combined therapy increased T cells at tumor sites and stimulated a complete response in 33% of patients. Read more in Oncolytic Virotherapy Promotes Intratumoral T Cell Infiltration and Improves Anti-PD-1 Immunotherapy, the first phase 1 clinical trial report ever published in Cell.
With his sights set on optimizing cancer immunotherapy, Dr. Ribas plans to learn as much as he can by testing new treatments, including adoptive cell transfer therapy, and investigating the underlying immune system mechanisms that render treatments effective or ineffective.
The Future of Cancer Immunotherapy
Dr. Ribas wants to uncover the limits and potentials of the human immune system in the fight against cancer, a pursuit rooted in scientific understanding. When it comes to cancer, Dr. Ribas believes we can always know more about getting the immune system to fight back.
"Our progress did not happen by chance; it happened by understanding science, understanding the immune system, and turning that understanding into treatments." - Dr. Antoni Ribas
Parker Institue for Cancer Immunotherapy
Like Us on Facebook
Follow Us on Twitter
Subscribe to Our Videos on YouTube
Follow us on Instagram
Connect with Us on LinkedIn
Follow us on Pinterest
Follow us on Flickr
Follow us on Sharecare
Giving
Contact Us
Diversity
Emergency
Maps & Directions
Publications
Directory
Abuse Free
Volunteer
Biomed Library
Newsroom
Smoke-Free
Sitemap
Terms of Use
Report Broken Links
Like Us on Facebook
Follow Us on Twitter
Subscribe to Our Videos on YouTube
Follow us on Instagram
Connect with Us on LinkedIn
Follow us on Pinterest
Follow us on Flickr
Follow us on Sharecare