Immunotherapy Cancer Treatment Experts

What is Immunotherapy?

Immunotherapy is treatment that uses certain parts of a person’s immune system
to fight diseases such as cancer.

This can be done by either stimulating your own immune system to work better
generally to attack cancer cells, or by giving your immune system extra help
in the form of man-made immune system proteins. Immunotherapy works better for
some types of cancer than for others. It’s used by itself for some of these
cancers, but for others it seems to work better when used in combination with
other types of treatment.

Our Approach to Immunotherapy

Targeted therapy uses drugs to identify and attack specific cancer cells
without harming normal cells. Monoclonal antibodies and tyrosine kinase
inhibitors are two types of targeted therapy being studied in the treatment of
endometrial cancer. Targeted treatments are enhanced by the Washington
University Genomics and Pathology Services (GPS), which offers genomic testing
and next-generation sequencing that can identify optimal treatment strategies
for your specific cancer type and subtype.

In recent years there has been an increase in the number of laboratories at
Siteman Cancer Center performing translational tumor immunology research, and
a number of investigator-initiated cancer clinical trials are ongoing. Efforts
of Tumor Immunology Program members are currently focused into four central
themes:

The dynamic relationship between the immune system and cancer
The molecular basis of immune recognition of cancer
The impact of inflammation and immunosuppression on cancer development
Cancer immunotherapy

Vaccines and Immunotherapy:

Creating a personalized vaccine begins with samples of DNA from a patient’s
tumor and normal tissue and making a vaccine from the most likely proteins in
mutant cancer genes to stimulate the patient’s T-cells to attack the cancer.
Vaccines are currently being tested in trials for the treatment of cervical
and advanced breast cancer to allow your immune system to fight the cancer
without the harsh side effects of traditional chemotherapy.

Another type of vaccine targets a genetic mutation unique to glioblastoma, the
most common and the most aggressive high-grade brain cancer. Early data from
these vaccine drugs shows that patients who received the vaccine in addition
to the current standard therapy live more than twice as long as patients who
received standard therapy alone. The side effects were, in most cases, no
worse than those of a flu vaccine.

Dendrite approach:

Another ongoing clinical trial strategy calls for collecting fresh tumor
tissue in the operating room and processing it in a lab into a “soup.” Next,
researchers collect immune cells called dendritic cells from a patient and
activate them using the tumor soup before they are reinfused into the patient
in the form of a vaccine.

Checkpoint blockade therapy:

Another approach to immunotherapy involves controlling the checkpoint
blockade. Cancer cells shut off the T cells by activating a safety mechanism
called the checkpoint system, preventing them from attacking the tissue. Drugs
called checkpoint blockades disable the checkpoint, allowing the T cells to
unleash destruction on the tumors. But the approach also increases the chances
that those same immune cells erroneously will attack healthy tissue, causing
serious autoimmune disease. Researchers have found that by identifying mutated
tumor proteins that are the specific targets of the reactivated T cells that
attack the tumors, they can create vaccines that only unleash the T cells on
the tumors, and so far, tests have been very successful. Checkpoint blockade
therapy has been successful against advanced lung and skin cancers in clinical
trials.

Immunotherapy is also sometimes called biologic therapy. The following types
of biologic therapy are being used or studied in the treatment of melanoma:

Monoclonal antibodies: Ipilimumab is a monoclonal antibody that boosts the body’s immune response against melanoma cells. Other monoclonal antibodies are being studied in the treatment of melanoma. Pembrolizumab and Nivolumab can be used to treat patients whose tumor cannot be removed by surgery or has spread to other parts of the body.
Interferon affects the division of cancer cells and can slow tumor growth.
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) boosts the growth and activity of many immune cells, especially lymphocytes so they can attack and kill cancer cells.

New Directions:

A new center at Washington University is helping scientists use the power of
the immune system to fight infections and cancers. The Center for Human
Immunology and Immunotherapy Programs (CHiiPs) is part of BioMed21, the
university’s initiative to accelerate basic science discoveries into improved
diagnosis and treatment for patients. The center is housed in the BJC
Institute of Health. While immunotherapy uses the strength and reach of the
immune system to fight infections and cancer, scientists also need to develop
ways to restrain the immune system when it mistakenly attacks healthy tissue,
leading to autoimmune conditions such as multiple sclerosis. Recent insights
from pioneering researchers at the School of Medicine include proof that the
immune system can recognize cancers and regulate their growth. The scientists
also have identified ways to manipulate the immune system’s ability to destroy
cancer cells.

For example, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the most common form
of pancreas cancer, accounting for more than 80 percent of cases. The cancer
has proven highly resistant to treatment, making development of new
therapeutic approaches a major priority. Four collaborative projects attacking
the cancer through immunologic therapy and drug development are successfully
moving laboratory discoveries from bench to bedside to address a very
difficult disease.

The projects draw on the expertise of surgeons, oncologists and basic
scientists. Goals include:

Develop and test personalized vaccines for PDAC patients based on their genetic factors
Evaluate a strategy to overcome the immune suppression caused by tumors
Screen combinations of drugs for inhibiting molecular pathways that foster tumor survival Develop a delivery platform for small-molecule drugs that  sends drugs directly to tumors and avoids adverse side effects

Washington University Department of Pathology and Immunology

To learn more about the Department of Pathology and Immunology at Washington
University School of Medicine, please visit their website
http://pathology.wustl.edu/.

