Immunotherapy success touted in study

Share This Story!

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Immunotherapy extends lives of patients with aggressive breast cancer,
study says

A study suggests immunotherapy has extended the lives of some patients with
triple negative breast cancer, the most aggressive form of the disease.

Sent!

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

Posted!

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.

 Immunotherapy extends lives of patients with aggressive breast cancer, study
says

CLOSE

The Dendreon CEO and GE Ventures CEO explain. Time

Immunotherapy has helped patients with an aggressive form of breast cancer
live longer, a study published Saturday said.(Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Immunotherapy, treatment used to help boost the body's immune system, allowed
some patients with an aggressive form of breast cancer to live longer, a study
finds.

The treatment is the first immunotherapy to improve the outcomes of patients
with triple negative breast cancer, said Peter Schmid, the study's author and
Clinical Director of the St. Bartholomew’s Breast Cancer Centre in London.

Findings were presented during the European Society for Medical Oncology's
2018 Congress on Saturday and published in the New England Journal of
Medicine.

Researchers ran a clinical trial involving more than 900 patients with
metastatic triple negative breast cancer who did not receive earlier treatment
for metastatic disease.

Patients receiving a combination of standard chemotherapy and the antibody
atezolizumab reduced the risk of the death or the disease getting worse by 20
percent.

Typically, the survival rate for patients with metastatic triple breast cancer
— a rare form of cancer often affecting younger women — is 12 to 15 months,
said researchers.

Schmid say the treatment "will change the way triple-negative breast cancer is
treated."

"This combination should become a new treatment option for patients with
metastatic triple negative breast cancer," said Schmid in a statement.

Multiple studies have shown how immune therapy can fight several cancers,
including malignant brain tumors and lung cancer.

More:Immune therapies improve treatment of cancers

Follow Brett Molina on Twitter: @brettmolina23.

Read or Share this story: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation-
now/2018/10/22/triple-negative-breast-cancer-immunotherapy-success-touted-
study/1725410002/

