The immune system finds and defends the body from infection and disease. Cancer is a complex disease that can evade and outsmart the immune system. It’s often not recognized until it has already become too difficult to handle.
Cancer immunotherapy improves the immune system’s ability to eliminate cancer. There are several types of immunotherapies, and each helps the immune system in a different way.
Types of immunotherapies
Immune checkpoint therapy helps cancer-fighting immune cells, called T cells, mount a longer-lasting response against the cancer.
Adoptive cellular therapy increases the number and/or effectiveness of immune cells, usually T cells, which improves the power of the immune response against the cancer. There are three main types of adoptive cellular therapy:
Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy gives patients large amounts of T cells that are all genetically engineered to find and fight the cancer.
Tumor infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) therapy uses a patient’s T cells that are collected from a piece of surgically-removed tumor. While these cells may recognize the cancer, there are too few of them to succeed. The number of these cells is increased substantially in the lab and then given back to the patient.
Endogenous T-cell (ETC) therapy uses T cells from a patient’s blood. From this diverse pool of T cells, doctors select only those that may recognize signatures specific to the cancer. The number of these specific T cells is increased substantially and then given back to the patient.
Cancer vaccines help the body recognize cancer cells and stimulate the immune system to destroy them. Cancer vaccines usually contain one of the following:
cancer cells taken from the patient’s tumor
proteins designed to attach themselves to cancer cells
proteins specific to a patient’s tumor
Monoclonal antibodies attach to specific proteins on the surface of cancer cells or immune cells. They either:
mark the cancer as a target for the immune system, or
boost the ability of immune cells to fight the cancer
Cytokine therapy relies on proteins called interferons and interleukins to trigger an immune response. Interleukin-2 (IL-2) is used to treat kidney cancers and melanomas that have spread to other regions of the body. Interferon alpha (IFN-alpha) is currently being used to treat melanoma, kidney cancer and certain leukemias and lymphomas. These cytokine treatments are also being combined with other types of immunotherapies to increase their effectiveness.
Each type of immunotherapy has distinct side effects. Moreover, certain immunotherapies are more effective for some types of cancer than others. A patient’s overall health and type of cancer determines which immunotherapies are available to them.
Sometimes two different types of immunotherapies are combined during treatment. Other times, a single immunotherapy is used with another type of therapy, such as chemotherapy. These combination approaches are used to improve treatment.
Several immunotherapies are standard treatments for certain cancers, while others are only offered through clinical trials. Some types of cancer aren’t treatable by current immunotherapies. To extend the benefits of immunotherapy, MD Anderson is leading research to identify new and more effective ways to improve the immune response to cancer.
Unleashing the Immune System to Attack Cancer
Clinical Trials
MD Anderson patients have access to clinical trials offering
promising new treatments that cannot be found anywhere else.
View clinical trials
Moon Shots Program
Our Moon Shots Program™ is dramatically accelerating the pace of
converting scientific discoveries into clinical advances that reduce
cancer deaths. Immunotherapy is one of our research engines driving the
program.
Learn more
How does cancer immunotherapy work?
Immunotherapy side effects: What to know
Immunotherapy side effects often differ from those commonly seen with other types of cancer treatment. Here’s what patients should know.
Learn about immunotherapy side effects
Customized cancer vaccines
Extremely personalized cancer vaccines are being examined for their ability to treat advanced stages of colorectal cancer.
Learn about customized cancer vaccines
Q&A: Understanding immunotherapy
Padmanee Sharma, M.D., Ph.D., one of MD Anderson’s immunotherapy experts, explains what immunotherapy is and who should consider it.
Learn more about immunotherapy
Combining immunotherapies
In a first-of-its-kind clinical trial, patients will receive an expanded dose of their own T cells followed by an immunotherapy drug known to boost T cells activity.
Learn about this combination therapy
Immunotherapy versus blood cancer
With more than 65 clinical trials underway to test immunotherapy’s effectiveness in treating blood cancers, MD Anderson is a leader in the field.
Learn about blood cancer immunotherapies