Therapy uses patient's own immune system to fight cancer
Cord blood transplant helps Rebecca Hertzog Burns beat the odds
Through immunotherapy, Rebecca achieved remission from the leukemia she faced not once, but twice in her life.
Immunotherapy and cellular therapeutics represent the future of cancer care – and they are happening today, right here at our cancer center.
Immunotherapy is a treatment in which the body’s own immune system is harnessed to fight back against cancer. The treatment can take several forms, including:
Stem cell transplant, in which the patient receives healthy donor cells to grow a new immune system
Medication infusion, in which injected antibodies manipulate the patient’s existing T cells to attack cancer cells
T-cell re-engineering, in which the patient’s own T cells are extracted from the body, genetically modified in a laboratory to fight cancer cells and returned by infusion to the patient’s body
The University of Kansas Cancer Center offers extensive experience in stem cell transplant, having performed more than 3,400 procedures in our program’s 40-year history. As a National Cancer Institute-designated cancer center and the region’s premier academic medical center, we are deeply committed to clinical trials that offer patients more options and greater access to the latest treatment discoveries.
CAR T-Cell Therapy Gives Husband, Father New Chance at Life
Groundbreaking CAR T-Cell Therapy Provides New Chance at Life.  Read Brad's' story.
Recently, our cancer center became one of the first sites in the nation to offer FDA-approved CAR T-cell therapies. These include YESCARTA™ for treatment of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in adults and KYMRIAH™ for treatment in patients up to 25 years old who have relapsed or refractory acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
Learn more about these precision cancer therapies and explore our immunotherapy FAQ.
Heloise Gray's aggressive leukemia demanded aggressive treatment. With no full match to be found in the donor registry, Heloise opted to take part in a clinical trial  –   an infused immunotherapy that brought about complete remission.
How it works
Immunotherapy is a biological therapy that uses the body’s immune system to fight cancer, including leukemia and lymphoma. For example, specific cells can be removed from the body and genetically modified or reprogrammed. When they are reintroduced into the patient, those cells have the ability to hunt and destroy the dangerous cancer cells.
Immunotherapy is one piece of personalized cancer care, considered the future of medicine by the National Cancer Institute. With this approach, treatment is tailored to the cellular level, with experts studying the individual’s cancer cells and then determining which type of therapy is most likely to destroy those cells. Other types of more traditional treatment include surgery, chemotherapy or radiation.
Make a gift to support immunotherapy.
Immunotherapy at The University of Kansas Cancer Center
Immunotherapy is not yet as widely used as surgery, chemotherapy or radiation therapy, but it has been approved to treat people with many types of cancer. As a National Cancer Institute-designated Cancer Center, our experts perform a high volume of procedures, including immunotherapy, to treat the most critically ill patients.
Because it’s a new type of treatment, many immunotherapies are being studied in clinical trials. And patients at The University of Kansas Cancer Center have greater
access to more clinical trials.
In fact, we are the only cancer center in the area that offers access to National Cancer Institute clinical trials.
Concierge assistance for patients and families
Patient Comfort & Travel Guide
We are honored to provide care for patients from across the nation and around the world. Visit our travel page for details on getting comfortable in Kansas City during your treatment.
At The University of Kansas Cancer Center, the rarest cases aren’t rare. We specialize in caring for patients with the most complex conditions. Our dedication to healthcare excellence and patient-focused care attracts patients from around the region and across the country.