Skip Navigation
Skip to content
Find a Condition
Find a Physician
Find a Location
MyChart
Health & Science News
Give
Comer Children's Hospital
Search
Menu
Patients & Visitors
Health Care Professionals
Research & Clinical Trials
1-888-824-0200
Flu season visitor restrictions are in effect beginning January 3, 2019. Learn more.
Close alert bar
See All Patient & Visitor Information
Conditions & Services
All Services
Cancer
Gastrointestinal
Heart & Vascular
Neurology
OB/GYN
Orthopaedics
Pediatrics
Surgery
Transplant
Women's Health
Patient Information
Billing
Contact Us
Insurance
International Patients
Locations & Directions
Patient Information
Planning Your Care
Request Medical Records
Second Opinions
Visitor Information
Flu Season Visitor Restrictions
Dining Options
Gift Shop
Locations & Directions
Our Neighborhood & City
Visitor's Guide
Request an Appointment
Request an Appointment
UChicago Medicine offers primary and specialty care at over 40 locations throughout Illinois and Indiana.
MyChart
MyChart
Communicate with your doctor, view test results, request appointments and more.
Close Menu
See All Health Care Professionals Information
Referring Physicians
About our Physicians
Contact Us
Physician Relations Team
Refer a Patient
UCM Physician Connect
Nursing
Nursing Awards
Nursing Careers
Nursing Education
Employee Resources
Continuing Medical Education
Continuing Nursing Education
Employee Login
Graduate Medical Education
Careers
Careers
UChicago Medicine offers a broad range of challenging clinical and non-clinical career opportunities doing work that really matters.
Close Menu
Research & Clinical Trials
Clinical Trials
Clinical Trial FAQs
Clinical Trial Resources
Find a Clinical Trial
Office of Clinical Research
Our Research
Our Nobel Laureates
The Forefront: Health & Science News
Research & Discoveries News
Biological Science News
Find a Clinical Trial
Find a Clinical Trial
Learn more about clinical trials and find a trial that might be right for you.
Close Menu
Appointments
Close
Request an Appointment
Please complete this secure form. The information you provide will help us assist you as efficiently as possible. A representative will contact you within one to two business days to help you schedule an appointment.
For questions, or to speak with someone directly, please call: 1-888-824-0200
New Patients
To request an appointment, please use our secure online form. A representative will contact you within one to two business days to help you schedule an appointment.
Request an Appointment
Existing Patients
Returning patients may also use MyChart to request an appointment.
MyChart
Contact Us
Contact form and phone numbers
MyChart
Close
MyChart
MyChart is not for medical emergencies. If you have a medical emergency, call 911.
If you need help with MyChart, call us at 1-844-442-4278
MyChart
Print
Share
Share with facebook
Share with twitter
Share with google
Share with linkedin
Home
Conditions & Services
Cancer
Cancer Immunotherapy
Cancer Immunotherapy
Skip to Main Content
Cancer
Cancer Immunotherapy
Explore the Comprehensive Cancer Center
About Us
Conditions & Treatments
Cancer Clinical Trials
Cancer Research & Innovation
Resources & Support
Get a Second Opinion
Community
Give
Education & Training
Find a Physician
Contact Us 1-855-702-8222
Participate In a Cancer Clinical Trial
UChicago Medicine cancer experts are actively conducting clinical trials of new treatments for cancer, including breakthrough methods to harness the immune system to fight cancer.
Thomas Gajewski, MD, PhD, is an internationally recognized expert in cancer immunotherapy.
Harnessing the Immune System to Fight Cancer
Your immune system protects you from infection, illness and substances that can harm your body. Immunotherapy refers to a medical treatment that turns the power of the immune system against disease. Cancer immunotherapy acts on the cells of the immune system to seek out, recognize and attack cancer.
Types of Cancer Immunotherapy
Several types of immunotherapy are approved for use to treat cancer or are being studied through clinical trials. The different kinds of immunotherapies work in different ways to treat cancer. Some boost the immune system to work against cancer, while others train the immune system to seek out and attack cancer cells.
CAR T-cell therapy involves the removal of T cells from a patient’s blood. These disease-fighting cells are then supercharged to recognize and destroy cancer cells. The University of Chicago Medicine was the first medical center in Illinois certified to offer CAR T-cell therapy.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors are drugs that block the proteins that cancer cells use to disarm an immune response, allowing T cells to attack and destroy tumor cells.
Monoclonal antibodies are man-made versions of immune system proteins, designed to attack a specific part of a cancer cell.
Cytokines are proteins made by your body’s cells that play a role in the body’s immune response to illness, including cancer. Interferon and interleukins are cytokines used to fight cancer.
Cancer vaccines involve substances put in the body to activate an immune response that helps prevent or treat cancer.
Clinical Trials
UChicago Medicine physicians lead immunotherapy clinical trials for the following types of cancer:
Bladder
Blood
Leukemia (acute lymphoblastic leukemia)
Lymphoma
Multiple Myeloma
Breast
Gastrointestinal
Head and neck
Liver
Lung (non-small)
Melanoma
Mesothelioma
Ovarian
Solid tumors
CAR T-Cell Therapy
CAR T-cell therapy supercharges a patient's white blood cells to seek out and destroy cancer cells. Research at UChicago Medicine played a key role in the development of this exciting new immunotherapy.
View videos and learn more
Convenient Locations for Cancer Care
Hyde Park - Chicago
5758 S. Maryland Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
1-855-702-8222
Get Directions
More About This Location
Harvey
1 Ingalls Dr.
Harvey, IL 60426
708-333-2300
Get Directions
More About This Location
New Lenox
1850 Silver Cross Blvd.
Carolyn J. Czerkies Pavilion
New Lenox, IL 60451
1-855-826-1400
Get Directions
More About This Location
Orland Park
14290 S. La Grange Rd.
Orland Park, IL 60462
1-888-824-0200
Get Directions
More About This Location
Immunotherapy Articles
CAR T-cell update: therapy improves outcomes for patients with B-cell lymphoma
A band of scientists
New checkpoint inhibitor shows promise in clinical trial for non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Novel biomarker found in ovarian cancer patients can predict response to therapy
An unexpected success for cancer immunotherapy treating prostate cancer
Dreams do come true after advanced care for lymphoma
2018 AACR annual meeting: Driving innovative cancer science to patient care
Tailored care for triple negative breast cancer
Clinical trial, team approach help breast cancer patient survive and thrive