An introduction to cancer immunotherapy

Immunotherapy has shown significant potential as a more targeted approach to
treating cancer by harnessing the body's immune system to fight tumor cells.
There are various cancer immunotherapy approaches to boost the response of the
immune system to cancer cells:

Immune checkpoint modulators – use monoclonal antibodies against specific receptors that modulate immune response. Cancer cells over-express these receptors to escape detection and destruction by the immune system.
Combination immunotherapy – combination of traditional therapies or combination of monoclonal antibody inhibitors with other checkpoint inhibitors or pathways, like CTLA-4 blockage plus PD-1/PD-L1 blockage for a synergistic effect.
Adoptive T-cell therapy – consists of tuning the patient’s tumor-specific T cells to help boost the ability of their immune system to overwhelm the tumor.
Vaccines – involves administration of neoantigens or other antigens that can be targeted by the T cells (eg targets for T cell recognition) to stimulate the patient’s immune responses against the tumor cells.

  

Find products to help you unlock the power of immunotherapy

  

Immune checkpoint modulators

The human immune system protects against foreign pathogens and diseases, but
it also plays a very important role in clearing the body’s own unhealthy and
ailing cells. As such, the immune system is also capable of recognizing and
eliminating cancer cells.

The T cells of the immune system have a capacity to selectively recognize and
kill pathogens or unhealthy cells by orchestrating a coordinated immune
response including innate and adaptive responses.

Many checkpoints ensure the cells of the immune system do not mistakenly
destroy healthy cells during an immune response (autoimmune reaction). Cancer
cells have adapted to exploit these immune checkpoints as way to evade immune
detection and elimination.

By blocking checkpoint inhibitors including PD-1, PD-L1 and CTLA-4 with
monoclonal antibodies, the immune system can overcome the cancer’s ability to
resist the immune responses and stimulate the body's own mechanisms to remain
effective in its defenses against cancer.

Figure 1. T cells can be inhibited by receptors expressed by tumor cells.
Using monoclonal antibodies against immune checkpoint receptors induces T cell
anti-tumor activity.

Read more about the PD-1/ PD-L1 pathway

  

Combination immunotherapy

The efficiency of the immune checkpoint blockade with monoclonal antibodies in
cancer treatment is remarkable and has durable effects; however, it is limited
to a subset of patients. To enhance and broaden the anti-tumor activity of
immune checkpoint inhibition the next step is combining agents with
synergistic mechanisms of action. Examples are the success of the combination
of PD-1/PD-L1 inhibition blockage with complementary checkpoint inhibitor
CTLA-4 1.

Another example is IDO (indoleamine-pyrrole 2,3-dioxygenase), this enzyme is
constitutively expressed in the tumor microenvironment either by tumor cells
or host immune cells and is stimulated by inflammatory cytokines as IFN-γ,
leading to host immune inhibition through increased Treg and effector T cell
proliferation blockage. Combination of IDO inhibition and immune checkpoint
blockage are currently under clinical investigation, with promising initial
results1.

Novel treatments like agonistic co-stimulatory antibodies costimulatory
molecules such as CD137 (4-1BB), CD134 (OX40), glucocorticoid-induced TNFR
(GITR; CD357), and CD40 are expressed by activated T cells, activated natural
killer (NK) cells, natural killer T (NKT) cells, Tregs, and other immune cells
are emerging new therapeutics1.

See effector T cell poster

  

Adoptive T cell therapy

Adoptive T cell therapy involves isolation of tumor-specific T cells from
patients and their expansion ex vivo. This method enables greater a number of
tumor-specific T cells to be generated than vaccination alone. The tumor-
specific T cells are then infused into patients in an attempt to give their
immune system the ability to overwhelm remaining tumor cells.  There are many
forms of adoptive T cell therapy used for cancer treatment:

Culturing tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)
Isolating and expanding a type of T cell or clone
Using T cells engineered to recognize and attack tumors

T cells are engineered to express chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) that
recognize cancer-specific antigens. Researchers can prime the cells to
recognize and kill tumor cells that would otherwise escape immune detection2
The process of generating CAR-T cells involves extracting a patient’s T cells,
transfecting them with a gene for a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR), then
reinfusing the transfected cells into the patient. The infusion of T cells is
generally well tolerated. Any adverse events from T-cell infusion are
infrequent and mild3 .

CAR-T cells and T cells with engineered tumor-specific TCRs show anti-tumor
activity in some solid tumors and hematological malignances1.

  

Vaccines

There have been recent advances in the development of peptide vaccines for
cancer therapy. Malignant cells express antigens that can be harnessed to
elicit anti-cancer immune responses. These antigens are able to stimulate the
patient’s specific T-cell responses against the tumor cells. This strategy can
be particularly important and efficient for low mutational burden tumors,
where anti-PD1 monotherapy efficiency is limited by low levels of T cell
clones primed for tumor antigens1.

Cancer vaccines consists of administration of tumor-associated antigens – for
example melanoma-associated antigen-A3 (MAGE-A3) – in the form of either
peptides or recombinant proteins in the presence of adequate adjuvants. The
antigen-presenting cells interact with the tumor-associated antigens to
initiate T-cell driven immune response against cancer cells that expresses the
antigen.

Targeting biologically relevant antigens via vaccination in animal models has
resulted in both tumor inhibition and modulation of the biology of the tumor
to make cancer more amenable to standard treatments 1.

Anti-cancer vaccines are often employed as therapeutic (rather than
prophylactic) agents. Current efforts are focused on identifying relevant
tumor rejection antigens, ie tumor-associated antigens that can elicit an
immune response leading to disease eradication.

  

Read next PD-1/PDL-1 pathway overview

​

References  

1\. Ott, P. et al. (2017). Combination immunotherapy: a road map. Journal for
ImmunoTherapy of Cancer (2017) 5:16  

2\. Grupp, S., Kalos, M., Barrett, D., Aplenc, R., Porter, D., Rheingold, S.,
Teachey, D., Chew, A., Hauck, B., Wright, J., Milone, M., Levine, B. and June,
C. (2013). Chimeric Antigen Receptor-Modified T Cells for Acute Lymphoid
Leukemia. New England Journal of Medicine, 368(16), pp.1509-1518.  

3\. Tey, S. (2014). Adoptive T-cell therapy: adverse events and safety
switches. Clin Trans Immunol, 3(6), p.e17.  

