Cartoons offer a peek into cancer immunotherapy

Four years ago, I was hired for a new and terrific job: to help my colleagues
at Solebury Trout and the investors we advise better understand the new field
of cancer immunotherapy. The next day I attended an immunotherapy conference
to learn everything I could.

One of the first people I approached was Zelig Eshhar, an Israeli immunologist
who has been called the father of CAR-T cell therapy. As we talked, he
exclaimed, “Oh — this is not so complicated,” then grabbed my notebook and
drew a little diagram to explain this technology. With a wink he said, “You
should frame this — I am famous.”

So I did, and set it on my desk at work.

One of the first scientists I brought in to talk with our team was Dr. Drew
Pardoll, head of immunology at Johns Hopkins. He saw Eshhar’s cartoon on my
desk and said, “Wow — that guy’s really famous.” So I asked Drew (who I think
is famous) if he wanted to draw a cancer immunotherapy cartoon, and he said
yes. So I framed it and put it, too, on my desk.

The first two cartoons in the author’s collection: “Still life: mouse with
T-body” by Zelig Eshhar, Ph.D., professor of chemical and cellular immunology
at Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel (left) and “Bad
neighborhood” by Drew Pardoll, M.D., co-director of the cancer immunology and
hematopoiesis program at Johns Hopkins University. Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory

Over the next two years, I accumulated nearly 50 drawings — some almost
professionally done, others closer to scribbles — and had to find new places
to put them.

One day, as my boss looked at the collection, he suggested that the drawings
would make an excellent starting point for a book about the scientists who
helped bring cancer immunotherapy to life. And that’s how my book, “A Cure
Within,” was born. Based entirely on interviews with immuno-oncology pioneers,
it helps trace the development of the work that is transforming cancer care.

I think that the cartoons also tell the story. The first two below are by this
year’s winners of the Nobel Prize in physiology or medicine, Jim Allison and
Tasuku Honjo. The others are a sample of the breadth of inventiveness that a
simple cartoon can offer about something as complex as cancer immunotherapy.

Immunotherapy cartoons by this year’s winners of the Nobel Prize in physiology
or medicine: “Raising the tail” by Jim Allison (left) and “Two-phased: Anti-
PD1” by Tasuku Honjo. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory“Gentlemen, start your
engines,” drawn by Tak Mak, Ph.D., senior scientist at the Princess Margaret
Cancer Centre in Ontario, Canada Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory“My first brain”
by Laurence Zitvogel, M.D., research director for tumor immunology and
immunotherapy at the Gustave Roussy Cancer Center in Villejuif, France Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory“Stealie cells” by Philip Greenberg, M.D., the head of
immunology at Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center and professor of
immunology at the University of Washington, both in Seattle. Note the Grateful
Dead reference. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory“Oncolytic T-vec” by Robert
Coffin, Ph.D., cofounder and CEO of Replimune in Woburn, Mass. Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory“CAR-T cell in action” by Michel Sadelain, M.D., director of
the Center for Cell Engineering at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in
New York Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory

Neil Canavan is the scientific adviser at Solebury Trout and author of “A Cure
Within: Scientists Unleashing the Immune System to Kill Cancer” (Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press, 2017). The cartoons here are a small sample of those
included in the book.

